
--- Page 1 ---
Complete
Chemistry
for Cambridge IGCSE®
Second Edition
RoseMarie Gallagher
Paul Ingram
Oxford and Cambridge  
leading education together


--- Page 2 ---
Complete
Chemistry
for Cambridge IGCSE®
Second Edition
RoseMarie Gallagher
Paul Ingram
Oxford and Cambridge  
leading education together

--- Page 3 ---

Great Clarendon Street, Oxford OX2 6DP
Oxford University Press is a department of the University of Oxford.  
It furthers the University’s objective of excellence in research, scholarship,  and education by publishing worldwide in
Oxford  New York
Auckland   Cape Town   Dar es Salaam   Hong Kong   Karachi  
Kuala Lumpur   Madrid   Melbourne   Mexico City   Nairobi  New Delhi   Shanghai   Taipei   Toronto
With offices in
Argentina   Austria   Brazil   Chile   Czech Republic   France   Greece  
Guatemala   Hungary   Italy   Japan   Poland   Portugal   Singapore  South Korea   Switzerland   Thailand   Turkey   Ukraine   Vietnam
© RoseMarie Gallagher and Paul Ingram 2011
The moral rights of the authors have been asserted
Database right Oxford University Press (maker)
First published as Complete Chemistry (ISBN 9780199147991)
This edition first published in 2007
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a 
retrieval system, or transmitted, in any form or by any means, without the prior permission in writing of Oxford University Press, or as expressly permitted by law, or under terms agreed with the appropriate reprographics rights organization. Enquiries concerning reproduction outside the scope of the above should be sent to the Rights Department, Oxford University Press, at the address above.
You must not circulate this book in any other binding or cover and you must 
impose this same condition on any acquirer
British Library Cataloguing in Publication Data
Data available
ISBN 978-0-19-913878-4
10 9 8 7 6
Printed in Malaysia by Vivar Printing Sdn. Bhd.
Paper used in the production of this book is a natural, recyclable product made 
from wood grown in sustainable forests. The manufacturing process conforms to the environmental regulations of the country of origin.
Acknowledgments 
®IGCSE is the registered trademark of Cambridge International Examinations.
The publisher would like to thank Cambridge International Examinations for their 
kind permission to reproduce past paper questions.
Cambridge International Examinations bears no responsibility for the example 
answers to questions taken from its past question papers which are contained in this publication. 
The acknowledgments for the photographs are on page 320.

--- Page 4 ---
iii
Introduction
If you are taking IGCSE chemistry, using the Cambridge International 
Examinations syllabus 0620, then this book is for you. It covers the syllabus fully, and has been endorsed by the exam board. 
Finding your way around the book
The contents list on the next page shows how the book is organised.  Take a look. Note the extra material at the back of the book too: for example the questions from past exam papers, and the glossary. 
Finding your way around the chapters
Each chapter is divided into two-page units. Some colour coding is used within the units, to help you use them properly. Look at these notes:
Core curriculum
If you are following the Core curriculum, you can ignore any material with a red line beside it.
Extra material
Pages of this colour contain extra material for some topics.  We hope that you will find it interesting – but it is not needed for the exam.Extended curriculum
For this, you need all the material on the white pages, including the material marked with a red line.
Chapter checkups
There is a revision checklist  at the end of each chapter,  and also a set of exam-level questions about the chapter,  on a coloured background.
Making the most of the book and CD
We want you to understand chemistry, and do well in your exams.  This book, and the CD, can help you. So make the most of them!
Work through the units
 The two-page units will help you build up 
 
your knowledge and understanding of the chemistry on your syllabus. Use the glossary
 If you come across a chemical term that you do not 
understand, try the glossary
. You can also use the glossary to test yourself. 
Answer the questions
 It is a great way to get to grips with a topic. 
 
This book has lots of questions: at the end of each unit and each chapter, 
and questions from past exam papers at the end of the book.
Answers to the numerical questions are given at the back of the book. 
Your teacher can provide the answers for all the others.
Use the CD
 The CD has an interactive test for each chapter
, advice on 
revision, sample exam papers, and more. And finally, enjoy!
 Chemistry is an important and exciting subject. 
W
e hope this book will help you to enjoy it, and succeed in your course. 
RoseMarie Gallagher  
Paul Ingram

--- Page 5 ---
Contents
1.1 Everyth ing is made of particles  6
1.2 Sol ids, liquids, and gases  8
1.3 The part icles in solids, liquids, and gases  10
1.4 A cl oser look at gases  12
  Checkup on Chapter 1
 14
2.1 Mixtur es, solutions, and solvents  16
2.2 Pur e substances and impurities  18
2.3 Separat ion methods (part I)  20
2.4 Separat ion methods (part II)  22
2.5 Mor e about paper chromatography  24
 
 The chr
omatography detectives
 26
  Checkup on Chapter 2
 28
3.1 Atoms and el ements  30
3.2 Mor e about atoms  32
3.3 Isotopes and radioact ivity  34
3.4 How el ectrons are arranged  36
 
 How our model of the atom devel
oped
 38
 
 The atom: the inside story
 40
3.5 The metals and non-metals  42
  Checkup on Chapter 3
 44
4.1 C ompounds, mixtures, and chemical change  46
4.2 Wh y do atoms form bonds?  48
4.3 The ion ic bond  50
4.4 Mor e about ions  52
4.5 The c ovalent bond  54
4.6 C ovalent compounds  56
4.7 C omparing ionic and covalent compounds  58
4.8 G iant covalent structures  60
4.9 The bonding in metals  62
  Checkup on Chapter 4
 64
5.1 The names and f ormuale of compounds  66
5.2 Equat ions for chemical reactions  68
5.3 The masses of atoms, mol ecules. and ions  70
5.4 Some cal culations about masses and %  72
  Checkup on Chapter 5
 74States of matter
1
Separating substances
2
Atoms and elements
3
Atoms combining
4
Reacting masses, and chemical equations
56.1 The mol e  76
6.2 Cal culations from equations, using the mole  78
6.3 React ions involving gases  80
6.4 The c oncentration of a solution  82
6.5 F inding the empirical formula  84
6.6 Fr om empirical to final formula  86
6.7 F inding % yield and % purity  88
  Checkup on Chapter 6
 90
7.1 Oxidat ion and reduction  92
7.2 Redo x and electron transfer  94
7.3 Redo x and changes in oxidation state  96
7.4 Oxidising and r educing agents  98
  Checkup on Chapter 7
 100
8.1 C onductors and insulators  102
8.2 The principl es of electrolysis  104
8.3 The r eactions at the electrodes  106
8.4 The el ectrolysis of brine  108
8.5 T wo more uses of electrolysis  110
  Checkup on Chapter 8
 112
9.1 Ener gy changes in reactions  114
9.2 Expla ining energy changes  116
9.3 Ener gy from fuels  118
9.4 G iving out energy as electricity  120
 
 The batteries in y
our life
 122
9.5 Reversibl e reactions  124
9.6 Sh ifting the equilibrium  126
  Checkup on Chapter 9
 128
10.1  Rates of r eaction  130
10.2  Measuring the rate of a r eaction  132
10.3  Changing the rate of a r eaction (part I)  134
10.4  Changing the rate of a r eaction (part II)  136
10.5  Expla ining rates  138
10.6  Catal ysts  140
 
 Mor
e about enzymes
 142
10.7  Photochem ical reactions  144
  Checkup on Chapter 10
 146Using moles
6
Redox reactions
7
Electricity and chemical change
8
Energy changes, and reversible reactions
9
The speed of a reaction
10

--- Page 6 ---
11.1  Acids and alk alis  148
11.2  A cl oser look at acids and alkalis  150
11.3  The r eactions of acids and bases  152
11.4  A cl oser look at neutralisation  154
11.5  Oxides  156
11.6  Making salts  158
11.7  Making insol uble salts by precipitation  160
11.8  F inding concentrations by titration  162
  Checkup on Chapter 11
 164
12.1  An overview of the P eriodic Table  166
12.2  Gr oup I: the alkali metals  168
12.3  Gr oup VII: the halogens  170
12.4  Gr oup 0: the noble gases  172
12.5  The transit ion elements  174
12.6  Acr oss the Periodic Table  176
 
 How the P
eriodic Table developed
 178
  Checkup on Chapter 12
 180
13.1  Metals: a r eview  182
13.2  C omparing metals for reactivity  184
13.3  Metals in c ompetition  186
13.4  The r eactivity series  188
13.5  Making use of the r eactivity series  190
  Checkup on Chapter 13
 192
14.1  Metals in the Earth’s crust  194
14.2  Extract ing metals from their ores  196
14.3  Extract ing iron  198
14.4  Extract ing aluminium  200
14.5  Making use of metals and al loys  202
14.6  Steels and steel-making  204
 
 Metals, civil
isation, and you
 206
  Checkup on Chapter 14
 208
15.1  What is a ir?  210
15.2  Making use of a ir  212
15.3  Pol lution alert!  214
15.4  The rust ing problem  216
15.5  W ater supply  218
 
 Living in space
 220
  Checkup on Chapter 15
 222
16.1  Hy drogen, nitrogen, and ammonia  224
16.2  Making ammon ia in industry  226Acids and bases
The Periodic Table
The behaviour of metals
Making use of metals
Air and water
Some non-metals and their compounds
16.3  F ertilisers  228
16.4  Sulfur and sulfur dio xide  230
16.5  Sulfuric acid  232
16.6  Carbon and the carbon cy cle  234
16.7  Some carbon c ompounds  236
16.8  Gr eenhouse gases, and global warming  238
16.9  Limestone  240
  Checkup on Chapter 16
 242
17.1  P etroleum: a fossil fuel  244
17.2  Refin ing petroleum  246
17.3  Cracking h ydrocarbons  248
17.4  F amilies of organic compounds  250
17.5  The alk anes  252
17.6  The alk enes  254
17.7  The al cohols  256
17.8  The carbo xylic acids  258
  Checkup on Chapter 17
 260
18.1  Intr oducing polymers  262
18.2  Addit ion polymerisation  264
18.3  C ondensation polymerisation  266
18.4  Making use of synthet ic polymers  268
18.5  Plast ics: here to stay?  270
18.6  The macr omolecules in food  (part I)  272
18.7  The macr omolecules in food  (part II)  274
18.8  Br eaking down the macromolecules  276
  Checkup on Chapter 18
 278
19.1  Chem istry: a practical subject  280
19.2  Ex ample of an experiment  282
19.3  W orking with gases in the lab  284
19.4  T esting for ions in the lab  286
  Checkup on Chapter 19
 288
Answers to the numerical quest
ions in this book
 290
 
Your Cambridge IGCSE chemistry exam
 
 About the Cambridge IGCSE chem
istry exam
 291
 
 Ex
am questions from Paper 2
 292
 
 Ex
am questions from Paper 3
 298
 
 Ex
am questions from Paper 6
 304
Reference
  Gl
ossary
 310
 
 The P
eriodic Table and atomic masses
 314
  Inde
x
 316Organic chemistry
Polymers
In the lab
19181711
12
13
14
15
16

--- Page 7 ---
1.1
Made of particles
Rock, air, and water look very different. But they have one big thing in 
common: they are all made of very tiny pieces, far too small to see.  For the moment, we will call these pieces particles.
In fact everything around you is made of particles – and so are you!
Particles on the move
In rock and other solids, the particles are not free to move around. But in 
liquids and gases, they move freely. As they move they collide with each other, and bounce off in all directions. 
So the path of one particle, in a liquid or gas, could look like this:
 All made of particles!
from
heretohere
The particle moves in a random way, changing direction every time it hits 
another particle. We call this random motion.
Some evidence for particles
There is evidence all around you that things are made of particles, and that they move around in liquids and gases. Look at these examples.
Evidence outside the lab
1 Cooking smells can spread out into the street. This 
is because ‘smells’ are caused by gas particles mixing with, and moving through, the air
. They dissolve in 
moisture in the lining of your nose.2  Y ou often see dust and smoke dancing in the air, in 
bright sunlight. The dust and smoke are clusters of particles. They dance around because they are being bombarded by tiny particles in the air. State S of matter
6
Everything is made of particles

--- Page 8 ---
Diffusion
In all those examples, particles mix by colliding with each other and 
bouncing off in all directions. This mixing process is called diffusion. 
The overall result is the flow of particles from where they are more 
concentrated to where they are less concentrated, until they are evenly spread out.
So what are these particles?
The very smallest particles, that we cannot break down further by chemical means, are called atoms.
  In some substances, the particles are just single atoms. For example argon,
 a gas found in air, is made up of single argon atoms.
  In many substances, the particles consist of two or more atoms joined together
. These particles are called molecules. Water, bromine, and the 
gases nitrogen and oxygen in air, are made up of molecules.
  In other substances the particles consist of atoms or groups of atoms that carry a charge. These particles are called 
ions. Potassium 
manganate(VII) is made of ions.
You’ll find out more about all these particles in Chapters 2 and 3.
‘Seeing’ particles
We are now able to ‘see’ the particles in some solids, using very powerful microscopes. For example the image on the right shows palladium atoms sitting on carbon atoms. In this image, the atoms appear over 70 million times larger than they really are!
 This image was taken using a 
tunneling electr
on microscope.  
The white blobs are palladium atoms,  
the blue ones are carbon. (The colour was added to help us see them.)
Q
1 The particles in liquids and gases show random motion. 
What does that mean, and why does it occur?
2 Why does the purple colour spr ead when a crystal of 
potassium manganate(VII) is placed in water?3 Br omine vapour is heavier than air. Even so, it spreads 
upwards in the experiment above. Why?
4 a What is diffusion?   b  Use the idea of dif fusion to 
explain how the smell of perfume travels.
water
particle
the crystalparticles from
the crystal mixamong thewater particlesairparticle
bromine
particlebromine particles
and air particlesnow fully mixed
waterparticle
the crystalparticles from
the crystal mixamong thewater particlesairparticle
bromine
particlebromine particles
and air particlesnow fully mixed
1 Place a crystal of potassium manganate(VII) in a 
beaker of water
. The colour spreads through the water. 
Why? First, particles leave the crystal – it dissolves. 
Then they mix among the water particles.2  Place an open gas jar of air upside down on an open  
gas jar containing a few drops of red-brown bromine. The colour spreads upwards because particles of bromine vapour mix among the particles of air.Evidence in the lab
7State S of matter

--- Page 9 ---
1.2State S of matter
8
Solids, liquids, and gases
What’s the difference?
It is easy to tell the difference between a solid, a liquid and a gas:
Water: solid, liquid and gas
Water can be a solid (ice), a liquid (water), and a gas (water vapour or 
steam). Its state can be changed by heating or cooling:
And when steam is cooled, the opposite changes take place:
You can see that:
  condensing is the opposite of evaporating
  freezing is the opposite of melting
  the freezing point of water is the same as the melting point of ice, 0  °C.A solid has a fixed shape and a fixed 
volume. It does not flow. Think of all the solid things around you: their shapes and volumes do not change.A liquid flows easily. It has a fixed volume, but its shape changes. It takes the shape of the container you pour it into.A gas does not have a fixed volume or shape. It spreads out to fill its container. It is much lighter than the same volume of solid or liquid.
1
 Ice
 slowly changes to water, 
when it is put in a warm place. This change is called melting. The thermometer shows 0
 °
C until 
all the ice has melted. So 0
 
°C is 
called its melting point.2
 When the water is heated its 
temperature rises, and some of it changes to 
water vapour. This 
change is called evaporation. The hotter the water gets, the more quickly it evaporates.3
 Soon bubbles appear in the 
water
. It is boiling. The water 
vapour shows up as steam. The thermometer stays at 100
 °
C 
while the water boils off. 100
 
°C is 
the boiling point of water.
steam condenses to form watercool below 100 °C freezes  or solidiﬁes
to form icecool below 0 °Cthermometer
shows 0 °C
ice cubes meltingwater vapour
water
heatwater vapour(invisible)
steam(visible)thermometershows 100°C
boiling water
heat

--- Page 10 ---
Q
1 W rite down two properties of a solid, two of a liquid, and 
two of a gas.
2 Which wor d means the opposite of:
 a
 
boiling?
     
b
 
melting? 
3 Which has a lower fr eezing point, oxygen or ethanol?
4 Which has a higher boiling point, oxygen or ethanol?5 Look at the heating curve above. 
 a
  About how long did it take for the ice to melt, once 
melting started?
 b
 How long did boiling take to complete, once it started?
 c
 T
ry to think of a reason for the difference in a and b.
6 See if you can sketch a heating curve for sodium.
9State S of matter
Other things can change state too
It’s not just water! Nearly all substances can exist as solid, liquid and gas. 
Even iron and diamond can melt and boil! Some melting and boiling points are given below. Look how different they are.
Showing changes of state on a graph
Look at this graph. It shows how the temperature changes as a block of ice is steadily heated. First the ice melts to water. Then the water gets warmer and warmer, and eventually turns to steam: 
A graph like this is called a heating curve. 
Look at the step where the ice is melting. Once melting starts, the 
temperature stays at 0
 
°C until all the ice has melted. When the water 
starts to boil, the temperature stays at 100
 
°C until all the water has turned 
to steam. So the melting and boiling points are clear and sharp.Substance Melting point  / °C Boiling point  / °C
oxygen –219 –183
ethanol –15 78
sodium 98 890
sulfur 119 445
iron 1540 2900
diamond 3550 4832
Heating curve for water
0123456789 10
Time (minutes)150
125100
755025
0
/H1100225water boilingwater
vapourgettinghotter
ice warming upice
meltingTemperature (°C)water warming up
(some evaporation occurs)
 Molten ir on being poured out at an 
iron works. Hot – over 1540
 
°C!
 Evaporation in the sunshine …


--- Page 11 ---
1.3
How the particles are arranged
Water can change from solid to liquid to gas. Its particles do not change. 
They are the same in each state. But their arrangement changes.  The same is true for all substances.
Changing state
Melting  When a solid is heated, its particles get more energy and vibrate  
more. This makes the solid expand. At the melting point, the 
 particles vibrate
 
so much that they break away from their positions. The solid turns liquid.State How the particles are arranged Diagram of particles
Solid
  
The particles in a solid are arrangedin a fixed pattern or lattice.Strong forces hold them together.So they cannot leave their positions.The only movements they make aretiny vibrations to and fro.
Liquid
 
The particles in a liquid can move about and slide past each other. They are still close together, but not in a lattice. The forces that hold them together are weaker than in a solid.
Gas
 
The particles in a gas are far apart,  and they move about very quickly. There are almost no forces holding them 
 together
. They collide with each 
other and bounce off in all directions.
solid the vibrations get larger a liquid is formedheat
energyheat energy at
melting pointState S of matter
10
The particles in solids, liquids, and gases

--- Page 12 ---
the particles get enough
energy to escape slow-moving particlesin liquid the particlesmove fasterheat energy at
boiling pointheat
energyBoiling  When a liquid is heated, its particles get more energy and move  
faster. They bump into each other more often, and bounce further apart. This 
makes the liquid expand. At the boiling point, the particles get enough energy to overcome the forces between them. They break away to form a gas:
Evaporating
 Some particles in a liquid have more energy than others. 
Even well below the boiling point, some have enough energy to escape 
and form a gas. This is called 
evaporation. It is why 
 puddles of rain dry 
up in the sun.
How much heat is needed?
The amount of heat needed to melt or boil a substance is different for every substance. That’s because the particles in each substance are different, with different forces between them. 
The stronger the forces, the more heat energy is needed to overcome 
them. So the higher the melting and boiling points will be.
Reversing the changes
You can reverse those changes again by cooling. As a gas cools, its particles lose energy and move more slowly. When they collide, they do not have enough energy to bounce away. So they stay close, and form a liquid. On further cooling, the liquid turns to a solid. 
Look at this diagram for water:
ice (solid) water (liquid)on heating, the particles gain energy
on cooling, the particles lose energy and move more slowly;
as they get closer together the forces of attraction take overmelts
at 0° Csteam (gas)as it warms up, some evaporates ;
the rest boils at 100° C
ice waterfreezes (solidiﬁes)
at 0° Csteamas you cool it below 100°C, the water
vapour begins to condense or liquify
Q
1 Using the idea of particles, explain why:
 a
 you can pour liquids
  
b
 solids expand on heating 
2 Draw a diagram to show what happens to the particles, 
when a liquid cools to a solid.3 Oxygen is the gas we br eathe in. It can be separated from 
the air. It boils at –219
 8
C and freezes at –183
 8
C.
 a
 In which state is oxygen, at:
  
i
 0
 8
C?
  
ii
 –200
 8
C?
 b
 How would you tur
n oxygen gas into solid oxygen?
!The kinetic particle theory
Look at the key ideas you have met:
 A substance can be a solid, a liquid, or a gas, and change from one state to another.
 It has different characteristics in each state. (For example, solids do not flow.)
 The differences are due to the way its particles are arranged, and move, in each state. 
Together, these ideas make up the kinetic particle theory. (Kinetic means about motion.)
11State S of matter

--- Page 13 ---
1.4State S of matter
12
A closer look at gases
What is gas pressure?
When you blow up a balloon, you fill it with air particles. They collide 
with each other. They also hit the sides of the balloon, and exert pressure on it. This pressure keeps the balloon inflated. 
In the same way, all gases exert a pressure. The pressure depends on the 
temperature of the gas and the volume it takes up, as you’ll see below.
When you heat a gas
The same happens with all gases: When you heat a gas in a closed container, its pressure increases.  That is why the pressure gets very high inside a pressure cooker.
When you squeeze a gas into a smaller space
The same thing is true for all gases: When a gas is compressed into a smaller space, its pressure increases.
All gases can be compressed. If enough force is applied, the particles can  
be pushed so close that the gas turns into a liquid. But liquids and solids cannot be compressed, because their particles are already very close together.The particles in this gas are moving fast. They hit the walls of the container and exert pressure on them. If you now heat the gas . . .. . . the particles take in heat energy and move even faster. They hit the walls more often, and with more force. So the gas pressure increases.
plunger pushed in
gas compressed
into a smallervolumegas particlesplunger pushed in
gas compressed
into a smallervolumegas particles
There is a lot of space between the 
particles in a gas. You can compress  
the gas, or force its particles closer, by pushing in the plunger …… like this. Now the particles are in a smaller space – so they hit the walls more often. So the gas pressure increases.
 In a pr essure cooker, water vapour 
(gas) is heated to well over 100
 
°C. So it 
is at high pressure. You must let a 
pressure cooker cool before you open it!
 When you blow up a bicycle tyr e, 
you compress air into the inner tube. The har der you blow, the greater the 
pressure inside the balloon.


--- Page 14 ---
13State S of matter
 The scent of flowers travels faster in 
a warm r
oom. Can you explain why?
 The faster a particle is moving when 
it hits another
, the faster and further it 
will bounce away. Just like snooker balls!The rate of diffusion of gases
On page 7 you saw that gases diffuse because the particles collide with 
other particles, and bounce off in all directions. But gases do not all diffuse at the same rate, every time. It depends on these two factors:
1
 The mass of the particles
 
The particles in hydrogen chloride gas are twice as heavy as those in 
ammonia gas. So which gas do you think will dif
fuse faster? Let’s see:
  Cotton wool soaked in ammonia solution is put into one end of a long tube (at A below). It gives of
f ammonia gas.
  At the same time , cotton wool soaked in hydrochloric acid is put into 
the other end of the tube (at B). It gives off hydrogen chloride gas.
  The gases dif fuse along the tube. White smoke forms where they meet:
The white smoke forms closer to B. So the ammonia particles have travelled further than the hydrogen chloride particles – which means they have travelled faster. The lower the mass of its particles, the faster a gas will diffuse.
That makes sense when you think about it. When particles collide and 
bounce away, the lighter particles will bounce further.
The particles in the two gases above are molecules. The mass of a 
molecule is called its relative molecular mass. So we can also say: The lower its relative molecular mass, the faster a gas will diffuse.
2
 The temperature
 
When a gas is heated, its particles take in heat energy
, and move faster. 
They collide with more energy, and bounce further away. So the gas 
diffuses faster. The higher the temperature, the faster a gas will diffuse.AB
cotton wool soaked
in ammonia solutionglass
tubewhite smoke
forms herecotton wool soakedin hydrochloric acid
Q
1 What causes the pressure in a gas?
2 Why does a balloon burst if you keep on blowing?
3  A gas is in a sealed container . How do you think the  
pressure will change if the container is cooled?  
Explain your answer.
4  A gas flows fr om one container into a larger one.  
What do you think will happen to its pressure?  Draw diagrams to explain.5 a Why does the scent of perfume spr ead?
 b
  Why does the scent of perfume wear of
f faster in warm 
weather than in cold?
6  Of all gases, hydr ogen diffuses fastest at any given 
temperature. What can you tell from this?
7  Look at the glass tube above. Suppose it was warmed a little in an oven, befor
e the experiment. Do you think that would 
change the result? If so, how?

--- Page 15 ---
Checkup on Chapter 1
Questions
Core curriculum
1 A large crystal of potassium manganate(VII) was 
placed in the bottom of a beaker of cold water
, and 
left for several hours.
 cold water
crystal of potassium manganate(VII)
 a Describe what would be seen:
  
i
 after five minutes
  
ii
 after several hours
 b
 Explain your answers using the idea of particles.
 c
  Name the two processes that took place during the experiment.
2
 Use the idea of particles to explain why:
 a
 solids have a definite shape
 b
 liquids fill the bottom of a container
 c
 you can’
t store gases in open containers
 d
  you can’
t squeeze a sealed plastic syringe that is 
completely full of water
 e
 a balloon expands as you blow into it.
3
  Below is a heating curve for a pure substance. It shows how the temperature rises over time, when the substance is heated until it melts, then boils.
 
 a What is the melting point of the substance?
 b
  What happens to the temperature while the substance changes state?
 c
  The graph shows that the substance takes longer to boil than to melt. Suggest a reason for this.
 d  How can you tell that the substance is not water?
 f
 Sketch a rough heating curve for pure water
.Revision checklist
Core curriculum
Make sure you can …
 give two examples of evidence, from the lab, that   
matter is made of particles
 explain what diffusion is, and how it happens
 name the three states of matter , and give their   
physical properties (hard, fixed shape, and so on)
 describe, and sketch, the particle arrangement in   
each state
 describe how a substance changes state when you   
heat it, and explain this using the idea of particles
 explain, and use, these terms:  
 
melt
 boil
 evaporate
 condense 
 melting point
 boiling point
 freezing point
 sketch, and label, a heating curve
 explain why a gas exerts a pressure
 explain why the pressure increases when you:
 
–
 heat a gas
 
–
 push it into a smaller space
Extended curriculum
Make sure you can also …
 describe an experiment to show that a gas will  
diffuse faster than another gas that has heavier particles 
 say how , and why, the temperature affects the rate 
at which a gas diffusesState S of matter
14


--- Page 16 ---
4 A cooling curve  is the opposite of a heating curve. 
It shows how the temperature of a substance 
changes with time, as it is cooled from a gas to a solid. Here is the cooling curve for one substance:
 
 a  What is the state of the substance at room temperature (20 
 
°C)?
 b
  Use the list of melting and boiling points on page 9 to identify the substance.
 c
 Sketch a cooling curve for pure water
. 
5
 Using the idea of particles explain why:
 a the smell of burnt food travels through the house
 b
  when two solids are placed on top of each other
, 
they do not mix
 c
 pumping up your bike tyres gives a smooth ride
 d
 smokers can cause lung damage in other people
 
e
  heating a gas in a closed container will increase its pressure
 f
 
  a liquid is used in a car’
s breaking system, to 
transfer the pressure from the brake pedal
 g
  poisonous gases from a factory chimney can af
fect a large area.
6 
 a
 Which of these are examples of dif
fusion?
  
i
 a helium-filled balloon rising in air 
  
ii
  a hydrogen-filled balloon deflating, due to gas passing through the skin
  
iii
  the smell of perfume from a person standing on the other side of a room
  
iv
  sucking a drink from a bottle, using a straw 
  v
  an ice lolly turning liquid when it is left out of the freezer
  
vi
  the tea in the cup changing colour when you
 add milk, without stirring
  
vii
  a light, coloured gas, spreading down through a gas jar 
  
viii
  a blue crystal forming a blue solution, when it is left sitting in a glass of water
  
ix
 spraying paint from a spray can. 
 b
  For 
one of the examples of diffusion, draw a 
diagram showing the particles before and after diffusion has taken place.Extended curriculum
7 Y ou can measure the rate of diffusion of a gas 
using this apparatus. The gas enters through the thin tube: 
 air H2
plug of
porous plasterhydrogengas (H
2) in
water risingin tube
water0
10
203040
 The measuring tube is sealed at the top with a plug 
of porous plaster
. Air and other gases can diffuse in 
and out through the tiny holes in the plug. 
 The water rises in the measuring tube if the chosen gas dif
fuses out through the plug faster than air 
diffuses in. Air is mainly nitrogen and oxygen.
 
a
  When you use hydrogen gas, the water rises in the measuring tube. Why?
 b  What does this tell you about the rate of dif
fusion 
of hydrogen, compared to the gases in air?
 c
  Explain your answer to 
b. Use the term mass! 
 d
  The molecules in carbon dioxide are heavier than those in nitrogen and oxygen. 
   So what do you think will happen to the water in the measuring tube, when you use carbon dioxide? Explain your answer
.
8
 Gas Formula Relative atomic or  
molecular mass
methane CH4 16
helium He 4
oxygen O2 32
nitrogen N2 28
chlorine Cl2 71
 Look at the table above.
 a
 Which two gases will mix fastest? Explain.
 b
  Which gas will take least time to escape from a gas syringe?
 c
  W
ould you expect chlorine to diffuse more 
slowly than the gases in air? Explain.
 d
  An unknown gas dif
fuses faster than nitrogen, 
but more slowly than methane. What you can say about its relative molecular mass?State S of matter
15

--- Page 17 ---
2.1
Mixtures
A mixture contains more than one substance. The substances are just 
mixed together, and not chemically combined. For example:
 air is a mixture of nitrogen, oxygen, and small amounts of other gases
 shampoo is a mixture of several chemicals and water .
Solutions
When you mix sugar with water, the sugar seems to disappear. That is because its particles spread all through the water particles, like this:
The sugar has dissolved in the water, giving a mixture called a solution. Sugar is the solute, and water is the solvent:
solute 1 solvent 5 solutionYou can’t get the sugar out again by filtering.
Not everything dissolves so easily
Now think about chalk. If you mix chalk powder with water, most of the 
powder eventually sinks to the bottom. You can get it out again by filtering.
Why is it so different for sugar and chalk? Because their particles are very different! How easily a substance dissolves depends on the particles in it. Look at the examples in this table:
Compound Mass (g) dissolving in 100 g of water at 25  °C
silver nitrate 241.3
calcium nitrate 102.1
sugar (glucose) 91.0
potassium nitrate 37.9
potassium sulfate 12.0
calcium hydroxide 0.113
calcium carbonate (chalk) 0.0013
silver chloride 0.0002
So silver nitrate is much more soluble than sugar – but potassium nitrate is a lot less soluble than sugar. It all depends on the particles.
Look at calcium hydroxide. It is only very slightly or sparingly soluble 
compared with the compounds above it. Its solution is called limewater.
Now look at the last two substances in the table. They are usually called 
insoluble since so very little dissolves.decreasing
solubility
 A mixtur e of sugar and water. 
This mixture is a solution.
 A mixtur e of chalk powder and 
water. This is not a solution. The tiny 
chalk particles do not separate and spread through the water particles. They stay in clusters big enough to see. In time, most sink to the bottom.
!What’s soluble, what’s not?
 The solubility of every substance is 
dif
ferent.
 But there are some overall patterns. For example all sodium compounds are soluble.
 Find out more on page 160.Separating 
S
ub
S
tance
S
16
Mixtures, solutions, and solvents

--- Page 18 ---
waterstirring rod sugarHelping a solute dissolve
Q
1 Explain each term in your own wor ds:
 a
 soluble
 b
 insoluble
 c
 aqueous solution
2 Look at the table on page 16.
 a
  Which substance in it is the most soluble?
 b
  About how many times mor
e soluble is this substance 
than potassium sulfate, at 25
 
°C?
 c
  The substance in 
a gives a colourless solution. What will 
you see if you add 300 g of it to 100 g of water at 25
 °C?
 d
  What will you see if you heat up the mixtur
e in c?3 Now turn to the table at the top of page 160.
 a
  Name two metals that have 
no insoluble salts.
 b
  Name one other gr
oup of salts that are always soluble.
4 See if you can give three examples of:
 a
  solids you dissolve in water
, at home
 b
  insoluble solids you use at home.
5 Name two solvents other than water that are used in the 
home. What are they used for?
6 Many gases dissolve in water. Try to give some examples.Sugar dissolves quite slowly in 
water at room temperature. If you stir the liquid, that helps. But if you keep on adding sugar …… eventually no more of it will dissolve, no matter how hard you stir. The extra sinks to the bottom. The solution is now saturated.But look what happens if you heat the solution. The extra sugar dissolves. Add more sugar and it will dissolve too, as the temperature rises.
So sugar is more soluble in hot water than in cold water.
A soluble solid usually gets more soluble as the temperature rises.A solution is called saturated when it can dissolve no more solute, at 
that temperature.
Water is not the only solvent
Water is the world’s most common solvent. A solution in water is called an aqueous solution (from aqua, the Latin word for water).
But many other solvents are used in industry and about the house, to 
dissolve substances that are insoluble in water. For example:
Solvent It dissolves
white spirit gloss paint
propanone (acetone) grease, nail polish
ethanol glues, printing inks, the scented substances that are used  
in perfumes and aftershaves
All three of these solvents evaporate easily at room temperature – they are 
volatile. This means that glues and paints dry easily. Aftershave feels cool because ethanol cools the skin when it evaporates.extra sugar sinks
to bottomall the sugarhas dissolved
heat
!About volatile liquids
 A volatile  liquid is one that evaporates easily. 
 This is a sign that the for ces between its particles are weak.  
 So volatile liquids have low boiling points too. (Pr opanone boils at 56.5 °C.)
17Separating SubStance S
 Nail polish is insoluble in water .  
It can be removed later by dissolving  
it in propanone.


--- Page 19 ---
2.2Separating SubStance S
18
Pure substances and impurities
What is a pure substance?
water 
particlewater particle water particle
This is water. It has only water 
particles in it, and nothing else. So it is 100% pure. This water has particles of other substances mixed with it. So it is not pure.This water has particles of a harmful substance in it. So it is not pure – and could make you ill.
A pure substance has no particles of any other substance mixed with it.
In real life, very few substances are 100% pure. For example tap water 
contains small amounts of many different particles (such as calcium ions and chloride ions). The particles in it are not usually harmful – and some are even good for you.
Distilled water is much purer than tap water, but still not 100% pure.  
For example it may contain particles of gases, dissolved from the air. 
Does purity matter?
Often it does not matter if a substance is not pure. We wash in tap water, without thinking too much about what is in it. But sometimes purity is very important. If you are making a new medical drug, or a flavouring for food, you must make sure it contains nothing that could harm people.
An unwanted substance, mixed with the substance you want, is called  
an impurity.
 Baby foods and milk powder ar e tested in the factory, to 
make sure they contain no harmful impurities. Getting r eady for a jab. Vaccines and medicines must be 
safe, and free of harmful impurities. So they are tested heavily.

--- Page 20 ---
These are the melting and boiling 
points for two pure substances: sulfur and water.This sulfur sample melts sharply at 119
 
°C and boils at 445
 
°C. So it 
must be pure.This water freezes around 20.5  °C 
and boils around 101
 
°C. So it is 
not pure.
Q
1 What does a pure substance mean?
2 Y ou mix instant coffee with water, to make a cup of coffee. 
Is the coffee an impurity? Explain.3 Explain why melting and boiling points can be used as a way 
to check purity
.
4 Could ther e be impurities in a gas? Explain.
!ID check!
  Every substance has a unique pair of melting and boiling points. 
  So you can also use melting and boiling points to identify a substance. 
  First, measure them. Then look up data tables to find out what the substance is.
19Separating SubStance S
 At the end of this r eaction, the 
beaker may contain several products, 
plus reactants that have not reacted. Separating them can be a challenge!
How can you tell if a substance is pure?
Chemists use some complex methods to check purity. But there is one 
simple method you can use in the lab: you can check melting and boiling points.
  A pure substance has a definite, sharp, melting point and boiling point.  
These are different for each substance. You can look them up in tables. 
 When a substance contains an impurity:
 –
 its melting point falls and its boiling point rises
 –
 it melts and boils over a range of temperatures, not sharply
. 
 The more impurity there is:
 –
 the bigger the change in melting and boiling points
 –
  the wider the temperature range over which melting and boiling occur
. 
For example:
Substance sulfur water
Melts at (
 
°C) 119 0
Boils at (
 
°C) 445 100
Separation: the first step in obtaining a pure substance
When you carry out a reaction, you usually end up with a mixture of 
substances. Then you have to separate the one you want. 
The table below shows some separation methods. These can give quite 
pure substances. For example when you filter off a solid, and rinse it well with distilled water, you remove a lot of impurity. But it is just not possible to remove every tiny particle of impurity, in the school lab.
Method of separation Used to separate…
filtration a solid from a liquid
crystallisation a solute from its solution
evaporation a solute from its solution
simple distillation a solvent from a solution
fractional distillation liquids from each other
paper chromatography different substances from a solution
There is more about these methods in the next three units.

--- Page 21 ---
2.3
!Saturated solutions
 Remember , most solutes get more 
soluble as the temperature rises – 
so less soluble as it falls!
 A saturated solution can hold no mor
e solute, at that temperature. Separating 
S
ub
S
tance
S
20
Separation methods (part I)
For example, chalk is insoluble in water. So it is easy to separate by filtering. 
The chalk is trapped in the filter paper, while the water passes through. The trapped solid is called the residue. The water is the filtrate.
1
 This is a solution of copper(II) 
sulfate in water
. You want to obtain 
solid copper(II) sulfate from it.2
 So you heat the solution to 
evaporate some of the water
. It 
becomes more concentrated.3
 Eventually the solution becomes 
saturated
. If you cool it now, 
crystals will start to form. 
4 Check that it is ready by placing a
 
drop on a microscope slide.
 Crystals
 
will form quickly on the cool glass.5
 Leave the solution to cool. 
Crystals start to form in it, as the temperature falls.6
 Remove the crystals by filtering.
 
Then rinse them with distilled water and dry them with filter paper.ﬁlter paper
ﬁlter funnel
ﬂaskchalk (the residue)
water (the ﬁltrate)suspension of
chalk in water
heat heat heat heat heat heat
blue crystalsof copper(II)sulfate
dilute copper (II)
sulfate solutionglass ro d
microscopeslide2 By cry stallisation
You can obtain many solids from their solutions by letting crystals form. 
The process is called crystallisation. It works because soluble solids tend to be less soluble at lower temperatures. For example:Separating a solid from a liquid
Which method should you use? It depends on whether the solid is dissolved, and how its solubility changes with temperature.
1 By filtering
 Filtering in the kitchen …

--- Page 22 ---
Q
1 What does this term mean?  Give an example.
 a
 
filtrate
 b
 r
esidue
2 Y ou have a solution of sugar in water. You want to obtain 
the sugar from it.
 a
 Explain why filtering will not work.
 b
 Which method will you use instead?3 Describe how you would crystallise potassium nitrate fr om 
its aqueous solution.
4 How would you separate salt and sugar? Mention any 
special safety pr
ecaution you would take.
5 Now see if you can think of a way to get clean sand fr om a 
mixture of sand and little bits of iron wire.
21Separating SubStance S
 Making a living fr om crystallisation. 
Seawater is led into shallow ponds.  
The water evaporates in the sun.  He collects the sea salt, and sells it.
To obtain salt from an aqueous 
solution, you need to keep heating the solution, to evaporate the water. When there is only a little water left, the salt will start to appear. Heat carefully until it is dry.
 Evaporating the water fr om a 
solution of salt in water.
 Evaporating the ethanol fr om a 
solution of sugar in ethanol, over a 
water bath.
evaporating
dish
salt solution
the water evaporates
leaving the salt behindheatevaporating
dish
salt solution
the water evaporates
leaving the salt behindheat3 By evaporat ing all the solvent
For some substances, the solubility changes very little as the temperature 
falls. So crystallisation does not work for these. Salt is an example.
Separating a mixture of two solids
To separate two solids, you could choose a solvent that will dissolve just one of them. 
For example, water dissolves salt but not sand. So you could separate a 
mixture of salt and sand like this:
1
 Add water to the mixture, and stir
. The salt dissolves.
2
  Filter the mixture. The sand is trapped in the filter paper
, but the salt  
solution passes through.
3
 Rinse the sand with water
, and dry it in an oven.
4
 Evaporate the water from the salt solution, to give dry salt.
W
ater could not be used to separate salt and sugar, because it dissolves 
both. But you could use ethanol, which dissolves sugar but not salt. Ethanol 
is flammable, so should be evaporated over a water bath, as shown here.

--- Page 23 ---
2.4Separating SubStance S
22
Separation methods (part II)
water out
condenser
salt water
water in
distilled waterheat
fractionating
column packedwith glass beads
ethanol
ethanol and waterthermometer
condenserwater out
water in
heat
 A petr oleum refinery. It produces 
petrol and many other useful substances, 
with the help of fractional distillation.
Simple distillation
This is a way to obtain the solvent from a solution.  
The apparatus is shown on the right. It could be used to  obtain water from salt water, for example. Like this:
1
  Heat the solution in the flask. As it boils, water 
 
vapour rises into the condenser, leaving salt behind.
2
 The condenser is cold, so the vapour condenses to 
 
 water in it.
3
  The water drips into the beaker
. It is called distilled  
water. It is almost pure. 
You could get drinking water from seawater, in this way. 
Many countries in the Middle East obtain drinking water  by distilling seawater in giant distillation plants. 
Fractional distillation
This is used to separate a mixture of liquids from each other. It makes use of their different boiling points. You could use it to separate a mixture of ethanol and water, for example. The apparatus is shown on the right. 
These are the steps:1
  Heat the mixture in the flask. At about 78
 °C, the ethanol 
begins to boil. Some water evaporates too. So a mixture of 
ethanol and water vapours rises up the column.
2
  The vapours condense on the glass beads in the column, making them hot.
3
  When the beads reach about 78
 °C, ethanol vapour no longer 
condenses on them. Only the water vapour does. So water drips back into the flask. The ethanol vapour goes into the condenser
.
4
  There it condenses. Pure liquid ethanol drips into the beaker
.
5
  Eventually
, the thermometer reading rises above 78 
 °C – 
 
a sign that all the ethanol has gone. So you can stop heating.
Fractional distillation in industry
Fractional distillation is very important in industry. It is used:
  in the petroleum industry , to refine crude oil into petrol and 
other groups of compounds. The oil is heated and the vapours rise to different heights, up a tall steel fractionating column.  See page 247.
  in producing ethanol . The ethanol is made by fermentation, 
using sugar cane or other plant material. It is separated from the fermented mixture by fractional distillation. Ethanol is used as a solvent, and as car fuel. See page 256.
  to separate the gases in air. The air is cooled until it is liquid, 
then warmed up. The gases boil off one by one. See page 212.

--- Page 24 ---
Q
1 How would you obtain pur e water from seawater?
 Draw the apparatus, and explain how the method works.
2 Why ar e condensers called that? What is the cold water for?
3 Y ou would not use exactly the same apparatus you 
described in 1, to separate ethanol and water. Why not?4 Explain how fractional distillation works.
5 In the last chr omatogram above, how can you tell that X 
does not contain substance C?
6 Look at the first chr omatogram above. Can you think of a 
way to separate the coloured substances from the paper?
23Separating SubStance S
ﬁlter paperdropper with ink dropper with water
colours begin
to separate
ﬁlter paperdropper with ink dropper with water
colours begin
to separateblue ring
red ring yellow ring
pencil line
XA BC D XA BC Dglass tank with lid
clip
propanonepencil line
XA BC D XA BC Dglass tank with lid
clip
propanonepencil line
XA BC D XA BC Dglass tank with lid
clip
propanonePaper chromatography
This method can be used to separate a mixture of substances.  
For example, you could use it to find out how many different dyes there are in black ink: 
1
 Place a drop of black ink in the
 
centre of some filter paper. Let it dry. 
Then add three or four more drops on the same spot, in the same way.2
 Now drip water onto the ink 
spot, one drop at a time. The ink slowly spreads out and separates into rings of dif
ferent colours.3
 Suppose there are three rings: 
yellow
, red and blue. This shows 
that the ink contains three dyes, coloured yellow, red and blue.
1
 Prepare concentrated solutions 
of 
X, A, B, C, and D, in propanone. 
Place a spot of each along a line, on chromatography paper. Label them.2
 Stand the paper in a little
 
propanone, in a covered glass tank. The solvent rises up the paper. When it’s near the top, remove the paper.3
 X has separated into three spots.
 
Two are at the same height as A  and 
B, so X  must contain substances A 
and B. Does it also contain C  and D ?The dyes in the ink have different solubilities in water. So they travel across the paper at different rates. (The most soluble one travels fastest.) That is why they separate into rings. The filter paper with the coloured rings is called a chromatogram. (Chroma means colour.)
Paper chromotography can also be used to identify substances. For 
example, mixture X is thought to contain substances A, B, C, and D, which are all soluble in propanone. You could check the mixture like this:
Note that you must use a pencil to draw the line on the chromatography 
paper. If you use a biro or felt-tipped pen, the ink will run.

--- Page 25 ---
2.5Separating SubStance S
24
More about paper chromatography
How paper chromatography works
Paper chromatography depends on how the substances in a mixture 
interact with the chromatography paper and the solvent. 
chromatography paper
1 These coloured dots represent  
a mixture of two substances.  The mixture is dissolved in a suitable solvent.2
 The two substances travel over  
the paper at different speeds, because of their different solubilities in the solvent, and attraction to the paper.3
  Eventually they get completely 
separated from each other
. Now 
you can identify the substances – and even collect them if you wish.
 The five mystery solutions.The more soluble a substance is in the solvent, the further it will travel up the chromatography paper.
Making use of paper chromatography
You can use paper chromatography to:
  identify a substance 
  separate mixtures of substances
  purify a substance, by separating it from its impurities.
Example: Identify substances in a colourless mixture
On page 23, paper chromatography was used to identify coloured substances. Now for a bigger challenge!
Test-tubes A
 
–
 
E on the right below contain five colourless solutions of 
amino acids, dissolved in water. The solution in A contains several 
amino acids. The other solutions contain just one each. 
Your task is to identify all the amino acids in A
 
–
 
E. 
 
1
  Place a spot of each solution along a line drawn in pencil on  
slotted chromatography paper
, as shown below. (The purpose  
of the slots is to keep the samples separate.)  Label each spot in pencil at the top of the paper.
 Amino acids coming up! When you 
digest food, the pr
oteins in it are broken 
down to amino acids. Your body needs 
20 different amino acids to stay healthy.

--- Page 26 ---
Q
1 Explain in your own wor ds how paper chromatography 
works.
2 a What do you think a locating agent is?
 b
  Why would you need one, in an experiment to separate 
amino acids by chr
omatography?
3 What makes Rf values so useful? 4 For the chr omatogram above:
 a
  W
ere any of the amino acids in B
 
–
 
E also present in A? 
How can you tell at a glance?
 b
  Using a ruler
, work out the Rf values for the amino acids 
in A
 
–
 
E.
 c
 Now use the 
Rf table above to name them.
25Separating SubStance S
ﬁnal
solvent level
starting pointABC DE
 2  Place a suitable solvent in the bottom of a beaker . (For amino acids,  
a mixture of water, ethanoic acid and butanol is suitable.)
 3
  Roll the chromatography paper into a cylinder and place it in the 
beaker
. Cover the beaker.
 4
  The solvent rises up the paper
. When it has almost reached the top, 
remove the paper.
 
5
  Mark a line in pencil on it, to show where the solvent reached. (Y
ou 
can’t tell where the amino acids are, because they are colourless.)
 6
 Put the paper in an oven to dry out.
 7
  Next spray it with a 
locating agent to make the amino acids show up. 
Ninhydrin is a good choice. (Use it in a fume cupboard!) After spraying, heat the paper in the oven for 10 minutes. The spots turn purple. So now you have a proper chromatogram. 
 8
  Mark a pencil dot at the centre of each spot. Measure from the base line to each dot, and to the line showing the final solvent level.
 9
 Now work out the 
Rf value for each amino acid. Like this:
  Rf value 5   distance moved by amino acid    _______________________________    distance moved by solvent  
 
10
  Finally
, look up Rf tables to identify the amino acids.  
Part of an Rf table for the solvent you used is shown on the right.  
The method works because: the Rf value of a compound is always 
the same for a given solvent, under the same conditions.Rf values for amino acids  
(for water
 
/
 
butanol
 
/
 
ethanoic acid 
as solvent)
amino acid Rf value
cysteine 0.08
lysine 0.14
glycine 0.26
serine 0.27
alanine 0.38
proline 0.43
valine 0.60 
leucine 0.73

--- Page 27 ---
26Separating SubStance S
The chromatography detectives
 After a crime, the for ensic detectives move in, looking for fingerprints and other 
samples they can use in evidence.
The key ideas in chromatography.
Much of chromatography is detective work. You have already met paper 
chromatography. There are many other kinds too. But the key ideas are always the same. 
 Y ou need two phases:
 
–
 a non-moving or 
stationary phase, such as filter paper
 –
  a moving or 
mobile phase. This consists of the mixture you want to 
separate, dissolved in a solvent. 
  The substances in the mixture separate because each has dif ferent 
levels of attraction to the solvent and the stationary phase. Look at the diagram on the right.
  Y ou can then identify each separated substance. Depending on the 
technique you use, you can also collect them.
Ringing the changes
Although those key ideas are always the same, the techniques used for chromatography can be quite different. For example:
The stationary phase could be … The mobile phase could be … To analyse the substances, you could …
 paper , as in paper chromatography
 a thin coat of an adsorbent substance 
on a glass plate, or inside a tube
 plastic beads packed into a tube a mixtur e of substances dissolved in a 
liquid, as in paper chromatography
 a mixtur e of gases, carried in an inert 
(unreactive) gas; this is called gas chromatography study the colour ed spots on the 
chromatogram, as in paper chromatography
 pass them thr ough a machine that will help 
you analyse them
the two substances
have now separated
the two substances
begin to separate as themobile phase moves
mobile phase
(in this case a mixtureof two substancesdissolved in a solvent)
stationary phase
 How chr omatography works.

--- Page 28 ---
27Separating SubStance S
Chromatography and crime detection
Chromatography is widely used in crime detection. For example it is 
used to analyse samples of fibre from crime scenes, check people’s blood for traces of illegal drugs, and examine clothing for traces of explosives. 
This shows how a blood sample could be analysed, for traces of illegal 
drugs, or a poison, using gas chromatography: 
2
 A sample of blood 
is injected into 
 
the carrier gas.3
 The mixture goes into a 
hot oven, where the blood 
sample forms a vapour
.
1
 The carrier gas is fed 
 
in. It could be helium or nitrogen, for example.4
 The vapour
 moves  
over the stationary phase:  an adsorbent substance lining a coiled glass tube.5
 The separated 
substances pass into a mass spectrometer
, 
where they are analysed.  6
 The data is fed into  
a recorder
. The police 
study it. They might make an arrest …
Other uses
Chromatography can be used on a small scale in the lab, or on a very large scale in industry. For example it is used on a small scale to:
 identify substances (such as amino acids, on page 277)
 check the purity of substances 
 help in crime detection (as above)
 identify pollutants in air , or in samples of river water.
It is used on a large scale to:
  separate pure substances (for example for making medical drugs or food
 flavourings) from tanks of reaction mixtures, in factories
  separate individual compounds from the groups of compounds (fractions)
 obtained in refining petroleum.
So chromatography is a really powerful and versatile tool.OVENinjector
carrier gas
coiled glass tubemass
spectrometer
recorder
 Injecting a sample into the carrier 
gas, at the start of gas chr
omatography.
 Collecting water samples, to analyse  
for pollutants. The factories that produce 
them could then be identified 
 – and fined.


--- Page 29 ---
Questions
Core curriculum
1  This question is about ways to separate and purify  
substances. Match each term on the left with the 
correct description on the right.
evaporation A
a solid appears as the solution cools i
condensing B
used to separate a mixture of two liquids ii
filtering C
the solvent is removed as a gas iii
crystallising D
this method allows you to recycle a solventiv
distillation E
a gas changes to a liquid, on cooling v
fractional distillation F
separates an insoluble substance from a liquidvi
 
2 This apparatus can be used to obtain pure water from salt water
.
ice-cold
watericesalt water
heat
 a What is the purpose of the ice-cold water?
 b
 The glass arm must reach far down into the 
 
 second test-tube. Why?
 c
 Where in the apparatus does this take place?
  
i
 
evaporation
  
ii
 condensation
 d
 What is this separation method called?
 e
  What will remain in the first test-tube, at the 
end of the experiment?Revision checklist
Core curriculum
Make sure you can …
 define and use these terms:  
 mixture
 solute
 solvent
 solution
 aqueous solution 
 give at least three examples of solvents 
 state that most solids become more soluble as the temperature of the solvent rises
 explain what these terms mean:  
 pure substance
 impurity
 give examples of where purity is very important
 say how melting and boiling points change, when  
an impurity is present 
 decide whether a substance is pure, from melting and boiling point data
 describe these methods for separating mixtures, and sketch and label the apparatus:
 
filtration
 
crystallisation
 evaporation to dryness
 simple distillation
 fractional distillation
 paper chromatography 
 explain why each of those separation methods works 
 say which method you would choose for a given mixture, and why 
 identify the coloured substances present in a mixture, 
using chromatography
Extended curriculum
Make sure you can also …
 explain what a locating agent is
 describe how to carry out chromatography , to 
identify colourless substances
 define Rf value
 identify the substances in a mixture, given a chromatogram and a table of 
Rf values.
Checkup on Chapter 2
Separating SubStance S
28

--- Page 30 ---
3 Seawater can be purified using this apparatus:
seawater
beakerB
C
A
heat
 a i   What is the maximum temperature recorded  
on the thermometer, during the distillation?
  ii
  How does this compare to the boiling point 
of the seawater?
 
b
  In which piece of apparatus does evaporation take place? Give its name.
 c
 i
 Which is the condenser
, A, B, or C?
  
ii
 Where does the supply of cold water enter?
 d
  Distillation is used rather than filtration, to purify seawater for drinking. Why?
4
 Gypsum is insoluble in water
. You are asked to 
purify a sample of gypsum that is contaminated with a soluble salt.
 a Wh ich of these pieces of apparatus will you use?  
 Bunsen burner  filter funnel  tripod
  distillation flask
 conical flask
 pipette
  
thermometer
 condenser
 gauze
  stirring rod
 filter paper
 beaker
 b
 W
rite step-by-step instructions for the procedure.
5
 Argon, oxygen, and nitrogen are obtained from air by fractional distillation. Liquid air
, at 2250
 
°C, is 
warmed up, and the gases are collected one by one.
 a
 Is liquid air a mixture, or a pure substance?
 b
  Explain why fractional distillation is used, rather than simple distillation. 
 c
  During the distillation, nitrogen gas is obtained first, then argon and oxygen. What can you say about the
 boiling points of these three gases? 
6
 A mixture of salt and sugar has to be separated, using the solvent ethanol.
 a
  Draw a diagram to show how you will separate the salt.
 b
  How could you obtain sugar crystals from the sugar solution, 
without losing the ethanol? 
 c
 Draw a diagram of the apparatus for 
b.7
 In a chromatography experiment, eight coloured substances were spotted onto a piece of filter paper
. 
Three were the basic colours red, blue, and yellow. The others were unknown substances, labelled A
 –
 E. This shows the resulting chromatogram:
 a Which one of substances  A  –  E contains only  
 one basic colour?
 b
 Which contains all three basic colours?
 c
  The solvent was propanone. Which of the three basic colours is the most soluble in propanone?
Extended curriculum
8 The diagram below shows a chromatogram for a
 mixture of amino acids.
solvent
front
sample
placed hereon pencil line
initial
solvent level12 cm 7.2 cm
5.2 cm
 The solvent was a mixture of water , butanol, and 
ethanoic acid.
 
a
  Using the table of 
Rf values on page 25, identify  
the two amino acids.
 b
 Which of them is less soluble in the solvent?
 c
  How will the 
Rf values change if the solvent 
travels only 6 cm?
9
 Y
ou have three colourless solutions. Each contains 
an amino acid you must identify. 
 Explain how to do this using chromatography
.
Use the terms Rf and locating agent in your answer, 
and show that you understand what they mean.Separating SubStance S
29

--- Page 31 ---
3.1
Atoms are the smallest particles of matter, that we cannot break 
down further by chemical means.  
Single atoms are far too small to see. Perhaps a million sodium atoms 
could fit in a line across this full stop. So you can see sodium only if there are enough sodium atoms together in one place!
In fact atoms are mostly empty space. Each consists of a nucleus and a 
cloud of particles called electrons that whizz around it. This drawing shows how a sodium atom might look, magnified many millions of times. 
The elements
Sodium is made of sodium atoms only, so it is an element.  An element contains only one kind of atom.
Around 90 elements have been found in the Earth and atmosphere. 
Scientists have made nearly 30 others in the lab. Many of the ‘artificial’ elements are very unstable, and last just a few seconds before breaking down into other elements. (That is why they are not found in nature.)
Symbols for the elements
To make life easy, each element has a symbol. For example the symbol for carbon is C. The symbol for potassium is K, from its Latin name kalium. Some elements are named after the people who discovered them.Atoms And elements
30
Atoms and elements
Atoms
Sodium is made of tiny particles called sodium atoms. 
 Collecting the element sulfur fr om  
a volcano crater in Indonesia. It is used 
as an ingredient in many cosmetics.Diamond is made of carbon atoms – 
different from sodium atoms. Mercury is made of mercury  atoms – different again!
nucleus
electron 
cloud
 This painting shows Hennig Brand, 
who discover
ed the element phosphorus, 
in 1669. It glows in the dark!


--- Page 32 ---
The table above is called the Periodic Table.
 It gives the names and symbols for the elements.
  The column and row an element is in gives us lots of clues about it.  
For example, look at the columns numbered I, II, III …  
The elements in these form families or groups, with similar properties.  
 So if you know how one element in Group I behaves, for example, you can make a good guess about the others.
 The rows are called periods.
  Look at the zig-zag line. It separates metals from non-metals, with the  
non-metals on the right of the line, except for hydrogen. So there is a change from metal to non-metal, as you go across a period.
Now look at the small numbers beside each symbol. These tell us a lot about the atoms of the element, as you will soon see.The Periodic Table
Q
1 What is:   a   an atom?    b   an element?    
2 If you could look inside an atom, what would you see?
3 The symbols for some elements come fr om their  
Latin names. See if you can identify the element whose  
Latin name is:
 a
 natrium
    
b  ferrum
    
c  plumbum
    
d  argentum4 Which element has this symbol?    a   Ca    b   Mg    c   N
5 See if you can pick out an element named after the   
famous scientist Albert Einstein.
6 Fr om the Periodic Table, name 
 a
 thr
ee metals
    
a
 thr
ee non-metals
 
 that you expect to behave in a similar way
.1Group Group0
7  Li3
lithium9  Be4
beryllium1  H1
hydrogen
23   Na11
sodium
39   K19
potassium
85   Rb37
rubidium
133    Cs  55
caesium
223    Fr  87
francium40   Ca20
calcium
88   Sr38
strontium
137    Ba  56
barium45   Sc21
scandium
89   Y39
yurium
139    La  57
lanthanium48   Ti22
titanium
91   Zr40
zirconium
178.5      Hf  72
hafnium51   V23
vanadium
93   Nb41
niobium
181    Ta  73
tantalum52   Cr24
chromium
96   Mo42
molybdenum
184    W  74
tungsten55   Mn25
manganese
99   Tc43
technetium
186    Re  75
rhenium56   Fe26
iron
101    Ru44
ruthenium
190    Os  76
osmium59   Co27
cobalt
103     Rh  45
rhodium
192     Ir  77
iridium59   Ni28
nickel
106    Pd  46
palladium
195    Pt  78
platinum64   Cu29
copper
108    Ag  47
silver
197    Au  79
gold65   Zn30
zinc
112    Cd48
cadmium
201    Hg  80
mercury70   Ga31
gallium
115     In49
indium
204     Tl  81207     Pb  82209     Bi  83210     Po  84210     At  85222     Rn  86
thallium11   B5
boron
27    Al13
aluminium
73   Ge32
germanium
119     Sn50
tin
lead12   C6
carbon
28    Si14
silicon
75   As33
arsenic
122     Sb  51
antimony
bismuth14   N 7
nitrogen
31   P15
phosphorus
79   Se34
selenium
128     Te  52
tellurium
polonium16   O8
oxygen
32    S16
sulfur
80   Br35
bromine
127     I 53
iodine
astatine19   F  9
ﬂuorine
35.5     Cl  17 
chlorine
84   Kr36
krypton
131     Xe54
xenon
radon
140    Ce  58
cerium141    Pr  59
praseodymium144    Nd  60
neodymium147    Pm  61
promethium150    Sm  62
samarium152    Eu  63
europium157    Gd  64
gadolinium159     Tb  65
terbium162     Dy 66165     Ho  67167     Er  68169     Tm  69173     Yb  70175     Lu  71
dysprosium holmium erbium thutium ytterbium lutetium
232    Th  90
thorium231    Pa  91
protactinium238    U  92
uranium237    Np  93
neptunium244     Pu  94
plutonium243    Am  95
americium247    Cm  96
curium247     Bk  97
berkelium251     Cf  98252     Es  99257     Fm100258    Md101259     No102262    Lw103
califormium einsteinium fermium mendelevium nobelium lawrencium20   Ne10
neon4   He2
helium
40    Ar18
argon
226    Ra  88
radium227    Ac  89
actinuim24   Mg12
magnesiumThe transition elements2
3
456
7
Lanthanides
ActinidesII I III IV VV I VII
31Atoms And elements
 The element chlorine is a poisonous 
gas. It was used as a weapon in World 
War I. This soldier was prepared.

--- Page 33 ---
3.2Atoms And elements
32
More about atoms
Protons, neutrons, and electrons
Atoms consist of a nucleus and a cloud of electrons that move around 
the nucleus. The nucleus is itself a cluster of two kinds of particles, protons and neutrons.
All the particles in an atom are very light. So their mass is measured in 
atomic mass units, rather than grams. Protons and electrons also have an electric charge:
 The nucleus is very tiny compar ed 
with the rest of the atom. If the atom 
were the size of a football stadium, the nucleus would be the size of a pea!Particle in atom Mass Charge
proton 1 unit positive charge (11)
neutron 1 unit none
electron almost nothing negative charge (12)
Since electrons are so light, their mass is usually taken as zero.
How the particles are arranged
The sodium atom is a good one to start with. It has 11 protons,  
11 electrons, and 12 neutrons. They are arranged like this:
Proton number
A sodium atom has 11 protons. This can be used to identify it, since only a sodium atom has 11 protons. Every other atom has a different number. You can identify an atom by the number of protons in it.
The number of protons in an atom is called its proton number.  
The proton number of sodium is 11.
How many electrons?
The sodium atom also has 11 electrons. So it has an equal number of protons and electrons. The same is true for every sort of atom: Every atom has an equal number of protons and electrons.  So atoms have no overall charge. 
Look at the box on the right. It shows that the positive and negative  
charges cancel each other, for the sodium atom.
!Note
Since they make up the atom,  
protons, neutrons and electrons are often called sub-atomic particles.
!The charge on a sodium atom:
  1 1 protons
  Each has a charge
 of 11
  T
otal charge 111
  11 electr
ons
  Each has a charge of 
12
  T
otal charge 112
Adding the charges: 111
  11
2
  0
The answer is zer
o.
The atom has no overall charge.×
×
××
×
××
×
××
×the electrons circle very fast
around the nucleus, atdifferent energy levels from it;these energy levels are called
shellsthe protons and neutrons cluster
together in the centre, formingthe nucleus; this is the heavypart of the atom


--- Page 34 ---
33Atoms And elements
!Try it yourself!
You can describe any element in a 
short way like this:
 nucleon number
 
symbol
  pr
oton number
For example: 
 16   8 ONucleon number
Protons and neutrons form the nucleus, so are called nucleons.  
The total number of protons and neutrons in an atom is called its nucleon number.  The nucleon number for the sodium atom is 23. (11 1 12 5 23)
So sodium can be described in a short way like this:  
 23   11 Na.
The lower number is always the proton number. The other number is the 
nucleon number. So you can tell straight away that sodium atoms have  12 neutrons. (23 2 11 5 12)
The atoms of the first 20 elements
In the Periodic Table, the elements are arranged in order of increasing proton number. Here are the first 20 elements, shown as a list:
Element Symbol Proton number Electrons Neutrons Nucleon number  
(protons 1 neutrons)
hydrogen H 1 1 0 1
helium He 2 2 2 4
lithium Li 3 3 4 7
beryllium Be 4 4 5 9
boron B 5 5 6 11
carbon C 6 6 6 12
nitrogen N 7 7 7 14
oxygen O 8 8 8 16
fluorine F 9 9 10 19
neon Ne 10 10 10 20
sodium Na 11 11 12 23
magnesium Mg 12 12 12 24
aluminium Al 13 13 14 27
silicon Si 14 14 14 28
phosphorus P 15 15 16 31
sulfur S 16 16 16 32
chlorine Cl 17 17 18 35
argon Ar 18 18 22 40
potassium K 19 19 20 39
calcium Ca 20 20 20 40
Q
1 Name the particles that make up the atom.
2 Which particle has:
 a
 a positive charge?
  b
  
no charge?
  
c
  almost no mass?
3 An atom has 9 pr otons. Which element is it?
4 Why do atoms have no overall charge?5 What does this term mean?   
 a
 pr
oton number
          
b
   nucleon number   
6 Name each of these atoms, and say how many pr otons, 
electrons, and neutrons it has:
  12   6 C   16   8 O   24   12 Mg   27   13 Al   64   29 CuSo the numbers of protons and electrons increase by 1 at a time – and are always equal. What do you notice about the number of neutrons?

--- Page 35 ---
3.3Atoms And elements
34
!Isotopes and radioactivity
How to identify an atom: a reminder
Only sodium atoms have 11 protons. 
You can identify an atom by the number of protons in it.
Isotopes
All carbon atoms have 6 protons. But not all carbon atoms are identical. Some have more neutrons than others. 
The three atoms above are called isotopes of carbon. 
Isotopes are atoms of the same element, with different numbers  of neutrons. 
Most elements have isotopes. For example calcium has six, magnesium 
has three, iron has four, and chlorine has two. 
Some isotopes are radioactive
A carbon-14 atom behaves in a strange way. It is radioactive. That means its nucleus is unstable. Sooner or later the atom breaks down naturally or decays, giving out radiation in the form of rays and particles, plus a large amount of energy. 
Like carbon, a number of other elements have radioactive isotopes – or 
radioisotopes – that occur naturally, and eventually decay.
But the other two isotopes of carbon (like most natural isotopes) are 
non-radioactive.
!Radiation may contain …
 alpha particles  – made up of  
2 protons and 2 electrons
  beta particles  – electrons  
moving at high speed
  neutrons
  gamma rays  – high energy rays Most carbon atoms are like this, with 6 neutrons. That makes 12  
nucleons (protons 1  neutrons) in 
total, so it is called carbon-12.But about one in every hundred carbon atoms is like this, with 7 neutrons. It has 13 nucleons in total, so is called carbon-13.And a very tiny number of carbon atoms are like this, with 8 neutrons. It has 14 nucleons in total, so is called carbon-14. 6 protons
6 electrons6 neutrons12
6C6 protons6 electrons7 neutrons13
6C6 protons6 electrons8 neutrons14
6C
 Radioisotopes are dangerous. This  
scientist is using a glove box, for safety.
Decay is a random process
We can’t tell whether a given atom of carbon-14 will decay in the next few seconds, 
or in a thousand years. But we do know how long it takes for half the radioisotopes in a sample to decay. This is called the half-life.
The half-life for carbon-14 is 5730 years. So if you have a hundred atoms of  
carbon-14, fifty of them will have decayed 5730 years from now. 
Half-lives vary a lot. For example:
  for radon-220  55.5 seconds
  for cobalt-60  5.26 years 
  for potassium-40  1300 million years

--- Page 36 ---
35Atoms And elements
Radiation can harm you
If the radiation from radioisotopes gets into your body, it will kill body cells. 
A large dose causes radiation sickness. Victims vomit a lot, and feel really tired. Their hair falls out, their gums bleed, and they die within weeks. Even small doses of radiation, over a long period, will cause cancer.
Making use of radioisotopes
Radioisotopes are dangerous – but they are also useful. For example:
To check for leaks
 Engineers can check oil and gas pipes for leaks by 
adding radioisotopes to the oil or gas. If a 
Geiger counter detects 
radiation outside the pipe, it means there is a leak. Radioisotopes used in 
this way are called tracers.
To treat cancer
 Radioisotopes can cause cancer
. But they are also used 
in radiotherapy to cure cancer – because the gamma rays in radiation kill 
cancer cells more readily than healthy cells. Cobalt-60 is usually used for this. The beam of gamma rays is aimed carefully at the site of the cancer in the body.
To kill germs and bacteria
 Gamma rays kill germs too. So they are 
used to sterilise syringes and other disposable medical equipment. 
They also kill the bacteria that cause food to decay
. So in many countries, 
foods like vegetables, fruit, spices, and meat, are treated with a low dose of radiation. Cobalt-60 and cesium-137 are used for this.
Q
1 a What are isotopes? 
 b
  Name the thr
ee isotopes of carbon, and write symbols  
for them.
2 Carbon-14 is radioactive. What does that mean?
3 What is a radioisotope? Give two examples.
4 a Radiation can kill us. Why? 
 b
 So why ar
e radioisotopes used to treat cancer?5 Radioisotopes can be used to check pipes for leaks. 
 a
 Explain how this works. 
 b
 How could you tell that a pipe had no leak? 
6 Spices ar e shipped all over the world, and are often stored  
for long periods.
 a
 They ar
e usually treated with radiation. Why?
 b
 Name two radioisotopes used for this. Checking for radiation using a Geiger 
counter
. The meter gives a reading, and 
you may also hear beeps.
 Another use for radiation: carbon-dating . Our bodies contain some carbon-14, 
taken in in food. When we die, we take no more in. But the carbon-14 atoms 
continue to decay. So scientists can tell the age of ancient remains by measuring the radioactivity from them. This mummy was found to be around 5300 years old.
 Radioisotopes ar e used as fuel in 
nuclear power stations, because they give out so much energy when they break down. See page 119 for more.

--- Page 37 ---
3.4Atoms And elements
36
How electrons are arranged
Electron shells
Electrons are arranged in shells around the nucleus. 
The first shell, closest to the nucleus, is the lowest energy level.  The further a shell is from the nucleus, the higher the energy level. 
Each shell can hold only a certain number of electrons. These are the rules:
The distribution of electrons in the atom above is written in a short way 
as 288. (Or sometimes as 2,8,8 or 2.8.8.)
The electron shells for the first 20 elements
Below are the electron shells for the first 20 elements of the Periodic Table.
The number of electrons increases by 1 each time. (It is the same as the 
proton number.) The shells fill according to the rules above. The first shell can hold only 2 electrons. It fills first.
The second shell can hold 8 electrons. It fills next.
The third shell can hold 18 electrons. But it fills up 
to 8. The next 2 go into the fourth shell (not shown). Then the rest of the third shell fills.nucleus
20 proton number
electron shells
electron distributionII III IVVV I VIIGroup
I
Period
1
2
3
40
1
H
1
3
Li
2/H1100114
Be
2/H1100125
B
2/H1100136
C
2/H1100147
N
2/H1100158
O
2/H1100169
F
2/H11001710
Ne
2/H1100182
He
2
Ar
2/H110018/H11001818
Cl
2/H110018/H11001717
S
2/H110018/H11001616
P
2/H110018/H11001515
Si
2/H110018/H11001414
Al
2/H110018/H11001313
Mg
2/H110018/H11001212
Na
2/H110018/H11001111
K
2/H110018/H110018/H11001119
Ca
2/H110018/H110018/H11001220 The Danish scientist Niels Bohr  
(1885 – 1962) was the first person to 
put forward the idea of electron shells.


--- Page 38 ---
37Atoms And elements
Patterns in the Periodic Table
Note these patterns for the table of the first 20 elements, on page 36:
 The period number  tells you how many shells there are.
  All the elements in a group have the same number of electrons in their 
outer shells. So Group I elements have 1, Group II have 2, and so on. 
 
These outer-shell electrons are also called the valency electrons. 
  The group number is the same as the number of outer-shell electrons, 
except for Group 0. 
  The valency electrons dictate how an element reacts. So the elements in Group I all have similar reactions, for example. 
Group O, a special group
The elements in Group 0 have a very stable arrangement of electrons. Their atoms all have 8 outer-shell electrons, except for helium, which  has 2. (It has only one shell.) 
This stable arrangement of electrons has a very important result: it makes 
the Group 0 elements unreactive.
The elements after calcium
After the 20th element, calcium, the electron shells fill in a more complex order. But you should be able to answer questions about electron distribution for later elements, if you remember the points above.
Example
 The element rubidium, Rb,
 is the 37th element in the Periodic 
Table. It is in Group I, Period 5. Its proton number is 37. What is its 
electron distribution?
Group I tells you there is 1 electron in the outer shell.
Period 5 tells you there are five shells.The proton number is 37, so there are also 37 electrons.The third shell holds 18 electrons, when full.
So the electron distribution for rubidium is: 2181181811.
 Sodium r eacts with water to give  
an alkaline solution. The other Group I 
metals react in a similar way – because their atoms all have one outer electron.
Q
1 One element has atoms with 13 electr ons. 
 a
 Draw a diagram to show the electr
on distribution. 
 b
 W
rite the electron distribution in this form:  2+ …
 c
 Name the element.
2 The electr on distribution for boron is 213. What is it for:     
a   lithium?
   b
  
magnesium?
   
c
  
hydrogen?3  An element has 5 valency electr ons. Which group is it in?
4 How many electr on shells do atoms of Period 3 have? 
5 The element krypton, Kr , is in Group 0, Period 4. Its proton
 number is 36. 
 a
 W
rite down the electronic configuration for krypton.
 b
 What can you say about the r
eactivity of krypton?He
helium atom
full outer shell of 2 electrons
stableneon atom
full outer shell of 8 electrons
stableargon atom
outer shell of 8 electrons
stableNe ArThe indicator phenolphthalein 
turns pink, showing that the 
solution is alkaline.sodium
!They all mean the same …
The terms
 electr
on arrangement
 electr
on distribution
 electr
onic configuration
all mean the same thing: how the 
electrons are arranged in shells.

--- Page 39 ---
38Atoms And elements
How our model of the atom developed
The two big ideas
All chemistry depends on these two big ideas: 
 everything is made of particles, and … 
  atoms are the simplest particles of an element, that cannot be broken 
down in 
a chemical reaction. 
But how did chemists find out about atoms? It’s a long story.
It began with the Ancient Greeks
In Ancient Greece (around 750 BC – 150 BC), the philosophers thought hard about the world around them. Is water continuous matter, or lots of separate bits? Is air just empty space? If you crush a stone to dust, then crush the dust, will you end up with bits that will not break up further?
The philosopher Democritus came up with an answer: everything is made 
of tiny particles that cannot be divided. He called them atoms. He said they came in four colours: white, black, red, and green. And in different shapes and sizes: large round atoms that taste sweet, and small sharp ones that taste sour. White atoms are smooth, and black ones jagged. 
He said everything is made up of these atoms, mixed in different amounts.Other philosophers thought this was nonsense. Aristotle (384–270 BC) 
believed that everything was made of four elements – earth, air, fire, and water – mixed in different amounts. A stone has a lot of earth but not much water. No matter how much you crush it, each tiny bit will still have the properties of stone.
On to the alchemists
The Greek philosophers did a lot of heavy thinking – but no experiments. The alchemists were different. They experimented day and night, mixing this with that. Their main quests were to find the elixir of life (to keep us young), and turn common metals into gold.
From about 600 AD, the practice of alchemy spread to many countries, 
including Persia (Iran), India, China, Greece, France, and Britain.
 The Gr eek philosopher Democritus 
(around 460
 –
 370 BC), shown her
e on  
a Greek bank note. A lot of thinking – 
but no experiments!
 The Persian alchemist Geber (ar ound 
721
 –
 815 AD) is often called ’the father
 
of chemistry’. 
 The alchemists developed many 
secr
et recipes.


--- Page 40 ---
39Atoms And elements
The alchemists did not succeed in making gold. But they made many 
substances look like gold, by using secret recipes to coat them with other substances. They also developed many of the techniques we use in the lab today, such as distillation and crystallisation. 
Make way for us chemists
Some alchemists got a reputation as cheats, who swindled ‘grants‘ from rich men with the promise of gold. In the end, by around 1600 AD, the alchemists gave way to a new breed of chemists.
By now the idea of atoms was almost forgotten. But in 1661 the scientist 
Robert Boyle showed that a gas can be compressed into a smaller space. He deduced that gas is made of particles with empty space between them. 
In 1799, over 130 years later, the French chemist Joseph Louis Proust 
showed that copper(II) carbonate always contained the same proportions by mass of copper, carbon, and oxygen, no matter how it was made: 5.3 parts of copper to 1 of carbon to 4 of oxygen. This suggested that copper, carbon, and oxygen were made of particles, and these always combined in the same ratios. 
Dalton’s dilemma
The English chemist John Dalton puzzled over these discoveries. In 1803 he concluded that if elements really were made of indivisible particles then everything made sense. He called the particles atoms, as a tribute to the Greek philosophers. He suggested that atoms of one element could combine with atoms of another element only in a fixed ratio. 
This time the idea of atoms caught on really fast, because it fitted with the 
results from so many experiments. 
Jiggling pollen grains
There was still one problem. No one could prove that matter was made of separate particles, since they were too small to see. But in 1827, a Scottish botanist called Robert Brown was studying some pollen grains in water, under a microscope. He saw them jiggling around. He deduced that they were being struck by water particles. That meant tiny separate particles really did exist. They were not just theory.
 Getting r eady to use the scanning tunneling miscroscope.And then …
In 1955 Erwin Müller, an American, developed a machine called a field-ion microscope. It could ‘picture’ the tip of a needle, magnified 5 million times! The atoms in the needle showed up as dots.
Today, microscopes are much more powerful. 
The scanning tunneling microscope gives us images of individual atoms, magnified by up to 100 million times. (See page 7 for an example.) 
Meanwhile, for many decades, scientists wondered 
what was inside atoms. And that is another story. Robert Boyle (1627  –  91). He was 
born in Ireland but did most of his work 
in England. He put forward Boyle’s Law for gases. And yes, it is a wig.


--- Page 41 ---
40Atoms And elements
The atom: the inside story
Bring on the physicists
By 200 years ago, chemists had accepted that everything was indeed made 
of tiny indivisible particles: atoms. But now we know they are not quite indivisible! In the last 120 years or so, we have learned a great deal about the particles inside atoms, thanks to physicists.
First, the electrons 
In 1897, the English physicist J.J. Thomson was investigating cathode rays. These mystery rays glowed inside an empty glass tube, when it was plugged into an electric circuit. 
He deduced that these rays were streams of charged particles, much 
smaller than atoms. In fact they were bits from atoms. He called them corpuscles, but soon the name got changed to electrons.
It was a shock to find that atoms were not the smallest particle after all! 
Thomson imagined that electrons were stuck on the atoms like raisins on a bun. The rest of the atom (the bun) had a positive charge.
More strange rays
A year earlier, a French physicist called Becquerel had been working  with crystals of a uranium salt. He found that they glowed in the dark.  By accident, he left some in a drawer, wrapped in thick paper, on top of a photographic plate. To his surprise, he found an image of the crystals on the plate. They had given out rays of some kind, that could pass through paper! He had discovered radioactivity.
Later, the English physicist Ernest Rutherford found that radiation could 
be separated into alpha particles, beta particles, and gamma rays. Alpha particles were found to be 7000 times heavier than electrons, with a positive charge. You could speed them up and shoot them like tiny bullets! (We know now they consist of two protons and two neutrons.) 
 The Polish scientist Marie Curie 
(1867
 –
 1934) hear
d about Becquerel’s 
discovery. She began to look for other 
radioactive substances – and discovered the elements polonium and radium.Marie Curie spent years searching for ways to use radiation in medicine.  Sadly, she herself died from cancer caused by exposure to radium.
 Becquer el’s plate, showing the image 
of the crystals.
Thomson’s atompositive
matter
negativeelectronsDalton’s atom

--- Page 42 ---
41Atoms And elements
The nucleus and protons
In 1911, in England, Ernest Rutherford was experimenting with alpha 
particles. He shot a stream of them at some gold foil. Most went right through it. But some bounced back! 
Rutherford deduced that an atom is mostly empty space, which the alpha 
particles can pass through. But there is something small and dense at the centre of the atom – and if an alpha particle hits this it will bounce back. He had discovered the nucleus. He assumed it was made up of particles of positive charge, and called them protons.
Those electron shells
If the nucleus is positive, why don’t the negative electrons rush straight into it? In 1913 Niels Bohr came up with the theory of ‘electron shells’. It fitted all the experiments.
At last, the neutrons
In 1930, two German physicists, Bothe and Becker, shot alpha particles at beryllium – and knocked a stream of new particles from it. In 1932 the English physicist James Chadwick found that these particles had the same mass as protons, but no charge. He named them neutrons.
So finally, 129 years after Dalton proposed the atom, the chemist’s model 
of it was complete.
The whole truth
But now for the whole truth. The model of the atom that we use works well for chemists. It explains how the elements behave. But it is only a model – a simplified picture. 
In fact atoms are far more complex than our model suggests. Physicists 
have discovered around 50 different elementary particles within atoms. They include the up and anti-up, the charm and anti-charm, and the strange and anti-strange. There may be even more to discover.
So those tiny atoms, far far too small to see, are each a throbbing universe 
of particles. And you are made up of atoms. Think about that!
 Sir James Chadwick, who gave the 
neutr
on its name.
 The Large Hadr on Collider. Scientists 
hope this machine will tell them more 
about the particles inside atoms.  It lies in a huge circular tunnel, 27 km across, on the border between France and Switzerland. Protons are accelerated through the pipes to enormous speeds, and allowed to collide.Rutherford’s atomelectron
nucleus
(protons)
Bohr’s atomelectronshells
Chadwick’s atomnucleus(protons +neutrons)

--- Page 43 ---
3.5Atoms And elements
42
The metals and non-metals
Two groups of elements
Look again at the Periodic Table on page 31. The zig-zag line separates the 
elements into two groups: metals and non-metals. The non-metals lie to the right of the line, except for hydrogen. 
As you can see, there are many more metals than non-metals. In fact over 
80% of the known elements are metals.
What is the difference between them? 
The metals and non-metals have very different general properties.  Look at this table:
The properties in the last two rows above are called chemical properties, 
since they are about chemical change. The others are physical properties. You will find out more about many of those properties later.
Exceptions to those properties 
The properties above are general properties of metals and non-metals.  But there are exceptions. For example:
 not all metals are hard solids. Y ou can cut sodium and potassium 
 with a knife, and mercury is a liquid at room temperature.
 hydrogen is a non-metal, but forms positive ions (H 1) like metals do.
  carbon is a non-metal, but one form of it (graphite) is a good conductor; another form (diamond) is very hard, with a very high melting point.General properties of metals General properties of non-metals
 good conductors of electricity and heat  do not conduct electricity or heat
  high melting and boiling points – which means  
they are solid at room temperature  lower melting and boiling points – many ar e gases  
at room temperature
 har d, strong, do not shatter if you hammer them      solid non-metals br eak up easily – they are brittle 
  can be hammer ed into different shapes (they are malleable) 
and drawn out to make wires (they are ductile)  solid non-metals ar e not malleable or ductile – they are brittle 
 look shiny when they ar e polished  look dull, in the solid state
 make a ringing noise when struck – they ar e sonorous  solid non-metals br eak up when you strike them
 have high density – they feel ‘heavy’  solid non-metals have low density
  form positive ions when they r eact.  
For example sodium forms sodium ions (Na1). 
You will learn about ions in Chapter 4.   often form negative ions when they r eact.  
For example oxygen forms oxide ions (O22).
  r eact with oxygen to form oxides that are bases.  
(In other words, the oxides can neutralise acids.)  r eact with oxygen to form oxides that are acidic.  
(Their aqueous solutions will turn litmus red.)
 Gold: malleable, ductile, attractive, 
unreactive, scarce – and expensive.


--- Page 44 ---
43Atoms And elements
Making use of the metals
Because metals are generally hard and strong, and good conductors, we 
make great use of them. For example:
  Iron is the most-used metal in the world. It is used in buildings, bridges, cars, tin cans (coated with tin), needles, and nails. 
 Copper is used for electrical wiring in homes.
 Aluminium is strong but light. So it is used in planes and space rockets.
Non-metals are everywhere
There are far fewer non-metals than metals. But they  are all around us – and inside us.
 Air is almost 80% nitrogen, and about 20% oxygen.
 W ater is a compound of hydrogen and oxygen.
  Our bodies are mostly water , plus hundreds of  
carbon compounds. Many of these contain atoms of other non-metals too, such as nitrogen, phosphorus, and iodine. (Plus metals such as calcium and iron.) 
  Sand is mainly the compound silicon dioxide,  
formed from silicon and oxygen.
Q
1 W ithout looking at the Periodic Table, see if you can 
 quickly list 30 elements, and give their symbols. 
 Then underline the metals. 
2  Explain what these terms mean. (The glossary may help.)  
conductor           ductile                 malleable        
brittle                  sonorous             density3 Aluminium is used for outdoor electricity cables. 
 See if you can suggest thr
ee reasons why.
4 W rite down what you think are the three main general 
 pr
operties that distinguish metals from non-metals. 
5 Give one example of a physical pr operty, and one of a 
 chemical pr
operty, for non-metals.  Think of two r easons why metals are used to make drums . . .
 . . . and thr ee reasons why they are used for saucepans.
 Sea, sand, sky, palms – made almost all of non-metals.

--- Page 45 ---
Checkup on Chapter 3
Questions
Core curriculum
1 Particle Electrons Protons Neutrons
A 12 12 12
B 12 12 14
C 10 12 12
D 10 8 8
E 9 9 10
 The table above describes some particles.
 a
 Which three particles are neutral atoms?
 b
  Which particle is a negative ion? What is the 
charge on this ion?
 c
  Which particle is a positive ion? What is the charge on this ion?
 d
 Which two particles are isotopes?
 e
  Use the table on page
 33 to identify A to E.
2
 The following statements are about the particles that make up the atom. For each statement write:
      
p
  if it describes the 
proton
      
e
  if it describes the 
electron
      
n 
 if it describes the 
neutron
 A
 the positively-charged particle
 B
 found with the proton, in the nucleus
 C
  the particle that can occur in dif
ferent numbers, 
in atoms of the same element
 D
 held in shells around the nucleus
 E
 the negatively-charged particle
 F
 the particle with negligible mass
 G
  the number of these particles is found by subtracting the proton number from the nucleon number
 H
 the particle with no charge
 I
 the particle with the same mass as a neutron
 J
  the particle that dictates the position of the element in the Periodic T
able
3
  The atoms of an element can be
  
represented by a set of three letters,  as shown on the right.
 a
 What does this letter stand for?
  
i
 X
  
ii
 y
  
iii
 z
 b
 How many neutrons are there in these atoms?
  
i
  107   47 Ag ii   63   29 Cu iii   1   1 H iv   20   10 Ne v   238   92 U
 c
  Bromine atoms have 36 neutrons. Describe a bromine atom, using the method in 
b.Revision checklist
Core curriculum
Make sure you can …
 define these terms:
 atom
 element
 compound
 say where in the atom the nucleus is, and which particles it contains
  define proton number and nucleon number
  state the number of protons, neutrons and electrons  
in an atom, from a short description like this: 
 23   11 Na
 explain what a radioisotope is
  give one medical and one industrial use, for radioisotopes
  sketch the structure of an atom, showing the nucleus and electron shells
  state the order in which electrons fill the electron shells
  name the first 20 elements of the Periodic T able, in 
order of proton number, and give their symbols
  sketch the electron distribution for any of the first  
20 elements of the Periodic Table, when you are given the proton number
  show electron distribution in this form:  
2 1 8 1 …
  define the term valency electron
  state the connection between the number of valency
 electrons and the group number in the 
Periodic Table
  state the connection between the number of electron shells and the period number in the Periodic T
able
  work out the electron distribution for an element, given its period and group numbers
  say how many outer-shell electrons there are in the 
atoms of Group 0 elements
  explain why the Group 0 elements are unreactive
  point out where the metals and non-metals are, in  
the Periodic Table
  give at least five key dif ferences between metals 
and non-metals
  name and give the symbols for the common metals 
and non-metals (including metals from the transition block of the Periodic Table)Xy 
zAtoms And elements
44


--- Page 46 ---
4  For each of the six elements aluminium (Al),   
boron (B), nitrogen (N), oxygen (O), phosphorus (P), 
and sulfur (S), write down:
 a
 i
  which period of the Periodic T
able it  
belongs to
  
ii
 its group number in the Periodic T
able
  
iii
 its proton number
  
iv
 the number of electrons in its atoms
  
v
 its electronic configuration
  
vi
 the number of outer electrons in its atoms
 b
  The outer electrons are also called the _____ electrons. What is the missing word? (7 letters!)
 c
  Which of the above elements would you expect to have similar properties? Why?
5
 Boron has two types of atom, shown below
. 
 a
 What is dif
ferent about these two atoms?
 b
 What name is given to atoms like these?
 c
 Describe each atom in shorthand form, as in 
3.
 d
 What is the nucleon number of atom A?
 e
 Is atom B heavier
, or lighter, than atom A?
 f
 i
  Give the electronic configuration for A 
and B.
  
ii
 Comment on 
your answer for i.
6
 The two metals sodium (proton number 11) and magnesium (proton number 12) are found next to each other in the Periodic T
able. 
 a
  Say whether this is the same, or dif
ferent, for 
their atoms:
 
  i
 the number of electron shells 
  
ii
 the number of outer (valency) electrons 
 The relative atomic mass of sodium is 23.0.
 The relative atomic mass of magnesium is 24.3.
 b
  Which of the two elements may exist naturally as a single isotope? Explain your answer
.
7
 Strontium, proton number 38, is in the fifth period of the Periodic T
able. It belongs to Group II. 
 Copy and complete the following.
 An atom of strontium has:
 a
 ……………..   electrons
 b
 …………….    shells of electrons
 c
 ……………..   electrons in its outer shell 8 This diagram represents the   
electronic arrangement in  
an atom of an element.
 a
 i
 Give the electron distribution for the atom.
  ii
 What is special about this arrangement?
 b
  Which group of the Periodic T
able does the 
element belong to?
 c
  Name another element with the same number of outer
-shell electrons in its atoms.
 9 Gallium exists naturally as a mixture of two non-radioactive isotopes, gallium-69 and gallium-71.
 
The proton number of gallium is 31.
 a
 i
 How many neutrons are there in gallium-69?
  ii
 How many neutrons are there in gallium-71? 
 Gallium also has a radioactive isotope, gallium-67.
 As gallium-67 decays, it 
gives out rays called 
gamma rays.
 b
  How does the radioactive isotope dif
fer from the 
non-radioactive isotope? 
 c
  Name two possible uses, one medical and one non-medical, for gallium-67.
10
 Read this passage about metals.  
Elements are divided into metals and non-metals.
 
All metals are electrical conductors. Many of them have a high density and they are usually ductile and malleable. All these properties influence the way the metals are used. Some metals are sonorous and this leads to special uses for them.
 a
 Explain the underlined terms.
 b
  Copper is ductile. How is this property useful in everyday life?
 c
  Aluminium is hammered and bent to make large structures for use in ships and planes. What property allows it to be shaped like this?
 d
 Name one metal that has a 
low density.
 e
  Some metals are cast into bells. What property must the chosen metals have?
 f
 Give
 the missing word: Metals are good 
   
 conductors of .......... and electricity
.
 g
  Choose another physical property of metals, and give two examples of how it is useful.
 h
  Phosphorus is a solid non-metal at room temperature.What other physical properties would you expect it to have?
 i
  Explain how the chemical properties of metals and non-metals can be used to tell them apart.Atoms And elements
45atom A atom Bproton
neutronelectron

--- Page 47 ---
4.1
Elements: a reminder
An element contains only one kind of atom. For example the element 
sodium contains only sodium atoms.
Compounds
A compound is made of atoms of different elements, bonded together.
The compound is described by a formula, made from the symbols of the 
atoms in it. (The plural of formula is formulae.)
There are millions of compounds. This table shows three common ones. 
Water has two hydrogen atoms joined or bonded to an oxygen atom. So its 
formula is H2O. Note where the 2 is written. Now check the formulae for 
carbon dioxide and ethanol. Are they correct?
Compounds and mixtures: the difference
A mixture contains different substances that are not bonded together.  So you can usually separate the substances quite easily, using methods like those you met in Chapter 2. For example:Name of compound Elements in it How the atoms are joined Formula of compound
water hydrogen and oxygen
OCO
H CO HH H
H HCO
H HH2O
carbon dioxide carbon and oxygen
OCO
H CO HH H
H HCO
H H
CO2
ethanol carbon, hydrogen, and oxygenOCO
H CO HH H
H HCO
H H
C2H5OH
This is a mixture of iron powder  and sulfur. You could separate  them by dissolving the sulfur in methylbenzene (a solvent), and filtering the iron off.But if you heat the end of a metal rod in a Bunsen burner, and push  it into the mixture, the mixture starts to glow brighly. A chemical change is taking place. The result is a black compound called iron(II) sulfide. It is made of iron and sulfur atoms bonded together. Its formula is FeS. It will not dissolve in methylbenzene.Atoms combining
46
Compounds, mixtures, and chemical change  

--- Page 48 ---
Q
1 Explain the dif ference between a mixture of iron and sulfur 
and the compound iron sulfide.
2 When you light a piece of magnesium ribbon, it bur ns  
with a dazzling white light. A white ash forms. What signs 
are there that a chemical change has taken place?3 Is it a chemical change or a physical change? Give r easons.
 a
 a glass bottle br
eaking
 b
 butter and sugar being made into tof
fee
 c
 cotton being woven to make sheets
 d
 coal bur
ning in airThe signs of a chemical change
When you heat a mixture of iron and sulfur, a chemical change takes place. 
The iron and sulfur atoms bond together to form a compound. 
You can tell when a chemical change has taken place, by these three signs:1
 One or more new chemical substances are formed.
 
 Y
ou can describe the change by a word equation like this:
 
iron 1 sulfur  iron(II) sulfide
 
The 1 means reacts with, and the  means to form.
  The new substances usually look dif
ferent from the starting substances.  
For example sulfur is yellow, but iron(II) sulfide is black.
2
 Energy is taken in or given out, during the reaction.
 
 
 Energy was needed to start of
f the reaction between iron and sulfur, in 
the form of heat from the hot metal rod. But the reaction gave out heat 
once it began – the mixture glowed brightly. 
3
 The change is usually dif
ficult to reverse. 
 Y
ou would need to carry out several reactions to get the iron and sulfur  
 back from iron sulfide. (But it can be done!)
A chemical change is usually called a chemical reaction.
It is different from physical change
IRON
FILINGSSULFUR
iron ﬁlings iron ﬁlingssolution of sulfur
in methylbenzeneiron ﬁlings
solution of sulfur
in methylbenzene
When you mix iron powder with 
sulfur, that is a physical change. No new substance has formed. If you then dissolve the sulfur …… in methylbenzene, that is also a physical change. The solvent could be removed again by distilling it. (Danger! It is highly flammable.)Now separate the iron by filtering. That is a physical change. You can reverse it by putting the iron back into the filtrate again.
No new chemical substances are formed in these changes.  If no new chemical substance is formed, a change is a physical change.
Unlike chemical changes, a physical change is usually easy to reverse.
47Atoms combining
 Bur ning gas, to fry eggs. Are 
chemical changes taking place?

--- Page 49 ---
4.2
The reaction between sodium and chlorine
Sodium and chlorine are both 
elements. When sodium is heated and placed in a jar of chlorine, it burns with a bright flame.The result is a white solid that has to be scraped from the sides of the jar. It looks completely different from the sodium and chlorine.
So a chemical reaction has taken place. The white solid is sodium chloride. Atoms of sodium and chlorine have bonded (joined together) to form a compound. The word equation for the reaction is:
   
sodium 1 chlorine  sodium chloride
Why do atoms form bonds?
Like sodium and chlorine, the atoms of most elements form bonds. 
Why? We get a clue by looking at the elements of Group 0, the noble 
gases. Their atoms do not form bonds.
This is because the atoms have a very stable arrangement of electrons in 
the outer shell. This makes the noble gases unreactive.
helium atom:  
full outer shell of 2 electrons – stableneon atom:  full outer shell of 8 electrons – stableargon atom:  outer shell of 8 electrons – stable
And that gives us the answer to our question:  
Atoms bond with each other in order to gain a stable arrangement of 
outer-shell electrons, like the atoms of Group 0.  
In other words, they bond in order to gain 8 electrons in their outer 
shell (or 2, if they have only one shell).He Ne Ar He Ne Ar He Ne Ar
2 2 1 8 2 1 8 1 8
Atoms combining
48
Why do atoms form bonds?
 Neon: the unr eactive gas used in 
light tubes for advertising.

 W
elding is often carried out in an 
atmosphere of argon, which will not 
react with hot metals (unlike oxygen).

--- Page 50 ---
49Atoms combining
How sodium atoms gain a stable outer shell 
A sodium atom has just 1 electron in its outer shell. To obtain a stable 
outer shell of 8 electrons, it loses this electron to another atom. It becomes a sodium ion:
The sodium ion has 11 protons but only 10 electrons, so it has a charge of 
11, as you can see from the panel on the right.
The symbol for sodium is Na, so the symbol for the sodium ion is Na
1.
The 1 means 1 positive charge. Na1 is a positive ion.
How chlorine atoms gain a stable outer shell 
A chlorine atom has 7 electrons in its outer shell. It can reach 8 electrons  
by accepting 1 electron from another atom. It becomes a chloride ion:
The chloride ion has a charge of 12 , so it is a negative ion. Its symbol is Cl
 2.
Ions
An atom becomes an ion when it loses or gains electrons. 
An ion is a charged particle. It is charged because it has an unequal number of protons and electrons.loses
1 electron
this shell disappears stable ion sodium atom sodium ion, Na/H11545
2/H110018/H110011[ 2/H110018]/H11001or [2,8]/H11001 or [2.8]/H11001 /H11545
Na Na
gains
1 electronchlorine atom chloride ion, Cl/H11546
stable ion[2/H110018/H110018]/H110022/H110018/H110017or [2,8,8]/H11002  or [2.8.8]/H11002/H11546
Cl Cl
!The charge on a sodium ion
charge on 11 protons  11 1
charge on 10 electrons 
 10
2
 total charge
   
11
!The charge on a chloride ion
charge on 17 protons  1 71
charge on 18 electrons 
 1
82
 total charge
   
12
Q
1 Why ar e the atoms of the Group 0 elements unreactive?
2 Explain why all other atoms ar e reactive.
3 Draw a diagram to show how this atom gains a stable outer 
shell of 8 electr
ons:
 a
 a sodium atom
    
b
 a chlorine atom 4 Explain why 
 a
 a sodium ion has a charge of 1
1
 b
 a chloride ion has a charge of 1
2.
5 Explain what an ion is, in your own words.
6 Atoms of Gr oup 0 elements do not form ions. Why not?

--- Page 51 ---
4.3Atoms combining
50
The ionic bond
How sodium and chlorine atoms bond together
As you saw on page 49, a sodium atom must lose one electron, and a 
chlorine atom must gain one, to obtain stable outer shells of 8 electrons.
So when a sodium atom and a chlorine atom react together, the sodium 
atom loses its electron to the chlorine atom, and two ions are formed. 
Here, sodium electrons are shown as  and chlorine electrons as  :
The two ions have opposite charges, so they attract each other. The force 
of attraction between them is strong. It is called an ionic bond.
The ionic bond is the bond that forms between ions of opposite charge.
How solid sodium chloride is formed
When sodium reacts with chlorine, billions of sodium and chloride ions 
form. But they do not stay in pairs. They form a regular pattern or lattice of alternating positive and negative ions, as shown below. The ions are held together by strong ionic bonds.
The lattice grows to form a giant 3-D structure. It is called ‘giant’ because it contains a very large number of ions. This giant structure is the compound sodium chloride, or common salt.
Since it is made of ions, sodium chloride is called an ionic compound. 
It contains one Na
1 ion for each Cl2 ion, so its formula is NaCl. 
The charges in the structure add up to zero: 
 the charge on each sodium ion is 
 1
1 
 the charge on each chloride ion is
 1
2
  total charge
 0
So the compound has no overall charge.1 electron
transferssodium atom chlorine atom sodium ion, Na/H11545chloride ion, Cl/H11546
giving
stable ion stable ion[2/H110018]/H11001[2/H110018/H110018]/H11002and 2/H110018/H1100112 /H110018/H110017/H11001 /H11002
Na Cl Cl Na
 These polystyr ene balls were given 
opposite charges. So they are attracted to 
each other, and cling together. The same happens with ions of opposite charge.sodium chloride – a lattice of
alternating positive and negative ions,held together by strong ionic bonds
sodium ion
chloride ion
!Bonding diagrams
To show the bonding clearly:
 use dots and crosses (o, •, and ×)   
for electrons from atoms of 
different elements 
 write the symbol for the element  in the centr
e of each atom.
 

--- Page 52 ---
51Atoms combining
two electrons transfermagnesium atom oxygen atom magnesium ion, Mg2/H11545oxide ion, O2/H11546
giving
[2/H110018]2/H11001[2/H110018]2/H11002and 2/H110018/H1100122 /H110016Mg O2/H110012/H11002
Mg O
magnesium atom2 chlorine atoms
2/H110018/H110012 each 2/H110018/H1100172 electrons
transfermagnesium
ion, Mg2/H11545two chloride ions, Cl/H11546
giving
[2/H110018]2/H11001
each [2/H110018/H110018]/H110022/H11001/H11002
/H11002MgCl
ClMgCl
ClOther ionic compounds
Sodium is a metal. Chlorine is a non-metal. They react together to form an 
ionic compound. Other metals and non-metals follow the same pattern.
A metal reacts with a non-metal to form an ionic compound.  
The metal atoms lose electrons. The non-metal atoms gain them.  The ions form a lattice. The compound has no overall charge.
Below are two more examples.
Magnesium oxide
A magnesium atom has 2 outer electrons and an oxygen atom has 6. When 
magnesium burns in oxygen, each magnesium atom loses its 2 outer electrons to an oxygen atom. Magnesium and oxide ions are formed:
The ions attract each other because of their opposite charges. Like the 
sodium and chloride ions, they group to form a lattice.
The resulting compound is called magnesium oxide. It has one magnesium 
ion for each oxide ion, so its formula is MgO. It has no overall charge.
Magnesium chloride
When magnesium burns in chlorine, each magnesium atom reacts with two  
chlorine atoms, to form magnesium chloride. Each ion has 8 outer electrons:
The ions form a lattice with two chloride ions for each magnesium ion. 
So the formula of the compound is MgCl2. It has no overall charge.
!The charge on magnesium  
oxide
charge on a magnesium ion  2 1
charge on an oxide ion
  2
2
 total charge
  0   
Q
1 Draw a diagram to show what happens to the electr ons, 
when a sodium atom reacts with a chlorine atom.
2 What is an ionic bond?
3 Describe in your own wor ds the structure of solid sodium 
chloride, and explain why its formula is NaCl.4 Explain why:
 a
 a magnesium ion has a charge of 2
1
 b
 
 the ions in magnesium oxide stay together
 c
 magnesium chloride has no overall charge
 d
 the formula of magnesium chloride is MgCl2.

--- Page 53 ---
4.4
Ions of the first twenty elements
Not every element forms ions during reactions. In fact, out of the first 
twenty elements in the Periodic Table, only twelve easily form ions. These ions are given below, with their names.
 
0
Group
I 
II 
III 
IV 
V 
VI 
VIInone
Li1 
lithiumBe21 
berylliumO22 
oxideF2 
fluoridenone
Na1 
sodiumMg21 
magnesiumAl31 
aluminiumS22 
sulfideCl2 
chloridenone
K1 
potassiumCa21 
calciumtransition 
elementsH1 
hydrogen
Note that:
  Hydrogen and the metals lose electrons and form positive ions. 
The ions have the same names as the atoms. 
  Non-metals form negative ions , with names ending in -ide.
  The elements in Groups IV and V do not usually form ions, because 
their atoms would have to gain or lose several electrons, and that takes too much energy
. 
  Group 0 elements do not form ions: their atoms already have stable outer shells, so do not need to gain or lose electrons.
The names and formulae of ionic compounds
The names  T o name an ionic compound, you just put the names of the 
ions together, with the positive one first:
 Ions in compound
 Name of compound
 
K1 and F2 potassium fluoride
 
Ca21 and S22 calcium sulfide
The formulae
 The formulae of ionic compounds can be worked out 
using these four steps. Look at the examples that follow
.
1
 W
rite down the name of the ionic compound.
2
 W
rite down the symbols for its ions.
3
  The compound must have no overall charge, so balance the ions until the positive and negative charges add up to zero.
4
 W
rite down the formula without the charges.
Example 11
 Lithium fluoride.
2
 The ions are Li
 1 and F  2.
3
  One Li
 1 is needed for every F 2, to make the total 
charge zero.
4
 The formula is LiF
.Example 21
 Sodium sulfide.
2
 The ions are Na
 1 and S  22.
3
  T
wo Na1 ions are needed for every S22 ion, to make 
the total charge zero: Na
 1 Na 1 S 22.
4
 The formula is Na2S. (What does the 2 show?)Atoms combining
52
More about ions
 Bath time. Bath salts contain ionic 
compounds such as magnesium sulfate 
(Epsom salts) and sodium hydr
ogen 
carbonate (baking soda). Plus scent! 

--- Page 54 ---
Example 3
1
 Sodium carbonate.
2
 The ions are Na1 and CO322.
3
  T
wo Na1 are needed to balance the charge on one 
CO322.
4
 The formula is Na2CO3.Example 41
 Calcium nitrate.
2
 The ions are Ca21 and NO32.
3
  T
wo NO32 are needed to balance the charge on  
one Ca21.
4
  The formula is Ca(NO3)2. Note that brackets are put 
round the NO3, before the 2 is put in.Some metals form more than one type of ion
Look back at the Periodic Table on page 31. Look for the block of transition elements. These include many common metals, such as iron and copper.
Some transition elements form only one type of ion:
  silver forms only Ag1 ions
  zinc forms only Zn21 ions.
But most transition elements can form more than one type of ion. 
For example, copper and iron can each form two:
Ion
 Name
 Example of compound
Cu1 copper(I) ion  copper(I) oxide, Cu2O
Cu21 copper(II) ion  copper(II) oxide, CuO
Fe21 iron(II) ion  iron(II) chloride, FeCl2
Fe31 iron(III) ion  iron(III) chloride, FeCl3
The (II) in the name tells you that the ion has a charge of 21.  
What do the (I) and (III) show?
Compound ions
All the ions you met so far have been formed from single atoms. But ions can also be formed from a group of bonded atoms. These are called compound ions.
The most common ones are shown on the 
right. Remember, each is just one ion, even though it contains more than one atom.
The formulae for their compounds can be 
worked out as before. Some examples are shown below.
Q
1 Explain why a calcium ion has a charge of 2 1.
2 Why is the charge on an aluminium ion 3 1?
3 W rite down the symbols for the ions in:
 a
 potassium chloride
 b
 calcium sulfide
 c
 lithium sulfide
 d
 magnesium fluoride
4 Now work out the formula for each compound in 3.5 W ork out the formula for each compound:
 a
 copper(II) chloride
 b
 ir
on(III) oxide
6 W rite a name for each compound: 
 CuCl,  FeS,  Mg(NO3)2,  NH4NO3,  Ca(HCO3)2
7 W ork out the formula for:  a  sodium sulfate
 b
 potassium hydr
oxide
 c
 silver nitrateNH4/H11001, the
ammonium ion
SO42–, the
sulfate ionCO32–, the
carbonate ionHCO3–, the
hydrogen carbonate ionNO3–, the
nitrate ionOH–, the
hydroxide ion
H
HH HN/H11001
HO/H11002
N O O
O/H11002
O
OO O S2/H11002H
OO
OC/H11002
OO
OC2/H11002
53Atoms combining
 The two oxides of copper .
copper(I) oxidecopper(II) oxide

--- Page 55 ---
4.5Atoms combining
54
The covalent bond
Why atoms bond: a reminder
As you saw in Unit 4.3, atoms bond in order to gain a stable outer shell of 
electrons, like the noble gas atoms. So when sodium and chlorine react together, each sodium atom gives up an electron to a chlorine atom. 
But that is not the only way. Atoms can also gain stable outer shells by 
sharing electrons with each other. 
Sharing electrons
When two non-metal atoms react together, both need to gain electrons to achieve stable outer shells. They manage this by sharing electrons. 
We will look at non-metal elements in this unit, and at non-metal 
compounds in the next unit. Atoms can share only their outer (valence) electrons, so the diagrams will show only these. 
Hydrogen
A hydrogen atom has only one shell, with one electron. The shell can hold two electrons. When two hydrogen atoms get close enough, their shells overlap and then they can share electrons. Like this:
So each has gained a full shell of two electrons, like helium atoms.
The bond between the atoms
Each hydrogen atom has a positive nucleus. Both nuclei attract the shared 
electrons – and this strong force of attraction holds the two atoms together. 
This force of attraction is called a covalent bond.  
A single covalent bond is formed when atoms share two electrons.
Molecules
The two bonded hydrogen atoms above form a molecule. A molecule is a group of atoms held together by covalent bonds.
Since it is made up of molecules, hydrogen is a molecular element.  
Its formula is H
2. The 2 tells you there are 2 hydrogen atoms in each 
molecule. 
Many other non-metals are also molecular. For example:
 iodine, I2 oxygen, O2 nitrogen, N2 
 chlorine, Cl2 sulfur , S8 phosphorus, P4
Elements made up of molecules containing two atoms are called diatomic. 
So iodine and oxygen are diatomic. Can you give two other examples?H H
a shared pair of electronsH Htwo hydrogen atoms a hydrogen molecul e, H2
 A model of the hydr ogen molecule. 
The molecule can also be shown as H–H. 
The line represents a single bond.Group 0
metalsnon-
metalsIII IIIV IV VI VII
 Atoms of non-metals do not give up  
electrons to gain a full shell, because they 
would have to lose so many. It would take too much energy to overcome the pull of the positive nucleus.

--- Page 56 ---
55Atoms combining
a chlorine molecule, Cl2 two chlorine atoms
Cl Cl Cl Cl
an oxygen molecule, O2 two oxygen atoms
O O O O
two shared pairs of electrons
a nitrogen molecul e, N2 two nitrogen atoms
N N N N
three shared pairs of electrons
 A model of the chlorine molecule. 
 A model of the oxygen molecule. 
 A model of the nitr ogen molecule. Chlorine
A chlorine atom needs a share in one more electron, to obtain a stable outer 
shell of eight electrons. So two chlorine atoms bond covalently like this:
Since only one pair of electrons is shared, the bond between the atoms is 
called a single covalent bond, or just a single bond. You can show it in a short way by a single line, like this: Cl2Cl.
Oxygen
An oxygen atom has six outer electrons, so needs a share in two more. So two oxygen atoms share two electrons each, giving molecules with the formula O
2. Each atom now has a stable outer shell of eight electrons:
Since the oxygen atoms share two pairs of electrons, the bond between them is called a double bond. You can show it like this: O5O.
Nitrogen
A nitrogen atom has five outer electrons, so needs a share in three more. So two nitrogen atoms share three electrons each, giving molecules with the formula N
2. Each atom now has a stable outer shell of eight electrons:
Since the nitrogen atoms share three pairs of electrons, the bond between them is called a triple bond. You can show it like this: NN.
Q
1 a Name the bond between atoms that shar e electrons.
 b
 What holds the bonded atoms together?
2 What is a molecule?
3 Give five examples of molecular elements.4 Draw a diagram to show the bonding in:
 a
 
 hydr
ogen
    
b
 
chlorine
5 Now explain why the bond in a nitr ogen molecule is   
called a 
triple bond.

--- Page 57 ---
4.6Atoms combining
56
Covalent compounds
Covalent compounds
In the last unit you saw that many non-metal elements exist as molecules. 
A huge number of compounds also exist as molecules. 
In a molecular compound, atoms of different elements share electrons.  
The compounds are called covalent compounds. Here are three examples.
The shapes of the molecules
Look at the models of the methane molecule, above and on the right.   
The molecule is tetrahedral in shape, because the four pairs of electrons around carbon repel each other, and move as far apart as possible.
Now look at the model of the water molecule above. The hydrogen atoms 
are closer together than in methane. This is because the two non-bonding pairs of atoms repel more strongly than the bonding pairs. So they push these closer together.
The angle between the hydrogen atoms in water is 104.5°.Covalent compound Description Model of the molecule
hydrogen chloride, HCl The chlorine atom shares one electron 
with the hydrogen atom. Both now have a stable arrangement of electrons in their outer shells: 2 for hydrogen (like the helium atom) and  8 for chlorine (like the other noble gas atoms). 
water, H2O The oxygen atom shares electrons with 
the two hydrogen atoms.
All now have a stable arrangement  
of electrons in their outer shells: 2 for hydrogen and 8 for oxygen.
methane, CH4 The carbon atom shares electrons with 
four hydrogen atoms.
All now have a stable arrangement  
of electrons in their outer shells: 2 for hydrogen and 8 for carbon.
Cl H
a molecule of hydrogen chloride
O
H H
a molecule of water
HH
HC
H
a molecule of methane
C
H
HHH
109.5
 The methane molecule: the same 
angle between all the H atoms.
!Most are molecular …
Most non-metal elements 
and their compounds exist as molecules.

--- Page 58 ---
57Atoms combining
Covalent compound Description Model of the molecule
ammonia, NH3 Each nitrogen atom shares electrons with 
three hydrogen atoms. 
So all three atoms now have a stable 
arrangement of electrons in their outer shells: 2 for hydrogen and 8 for nitrogen.
The molecule is shaped like a pyramid.
methanol, CH3OH 
The carbon atom shares electrons with 
three hydrogen atoms and one oxygen atom.
Look at the shape of the molecule:  
a little like methane, but changed by the presence of the oxygen atom.
 
carbon dioxide, CO2 
The carbon atom shares all four of its 
electrons: two with each oxygen atom. So all three atoms gain stable shells.
The two sets of bonding electrons repel 
each other. They move as far apart as they can, giving a linear molecule.
All the bonds are double bonds, so we can  
show the molecule like this: O
 5
 C
 5 O.
 
ethene, C2H4 
Look how each carbon atom shares its 
four electrons this time.
It shares two with two hydrogen atoms. 
and two with another carbon atom, giving a carbon-carbon double bond. 
So the molecule is usually  
drawn like this:
HH
HN
a molecule of ammonia
O C O
a molecule of carbon dioxide
H
HCH
C
H
a molecule of etheneMore examples of covalent compounds
This table shows three more examples of covalent compounds. Each time:
  the atoms share electrons, to gain stable outer shells
  repulsion between pairs of electrons dictates the shape of the molecule.
HH H
HCCa molecule of methanol
Q
1 a What is a covalent compound? 
 b
 Give five examples, with their formulae.
2 Draw a diagram to show the bonding in a molecule of: 
 a
 
methane
  b
 
water3 How do the atoms gain stable outer shells, in ammonia?
4 Draw a diagram to show the bonding in carbon dioxide.
5 Why is the carbon dioxide molecule straight, and not  
bent like the water molecule?.H
HH
CH
O


--- Page 59 ---
4.7Atoms combining
58
Comparing ionic and covalent compounds
Remember
Metals and non-metals react together to form ionic compounds. 
Non-metals react together to form covalent compounds.  The covalent compounds you have met so far exist as molecules.
Comparing the structures of the solids
In Chapter 1, you met the idea that solids are a regular lattice of particles. In ionic compounds, these particles are ions. In the covalent compounds you have met so far, they are molecules. Let’s compare their lattices.
A solid ionic compound
  
Sodium chloride is a typical ionic compound:
A solid molecular covalent compound
  W
ater is a molecular covalent 
compound. When you cool it below 0
 8
C it becomes a solid: ice.
So both types of compounds have a regular lattice structure in the solid 
state, and form crystals. But they differ in two key ways:
  In ionic solids the particles (ions) are charged, and the forces between  
them are strong. 
  In molecular covalent solids the particles (molecules) are not charged, and the 
forces between them are weak.
These differences lead to very different properties, as you will see next.sodium ion
chloride ion
In sodium chloride, the ions are held in a regular lattice like this. They are held by strong ionic bonds. The lattice grows in all directions, giving a crystal of sodium chloride. This one is magnified 35 times.The crystals look white and shiny.  We add them to food, as salt, to bring out its taste.
In ice, the water molecules are held in a regular lattice like this. But the forces between them are weak.The lattice grows in all directions, giving a crystal of ice. These grew in an ice-tray in a freezer.We use ice to keep drinks cool, and food fresh. (The reactions that cause food to decay are slower in the cold.)  weak
forces
watermolecules
!About crystals
 A regular arrangement of 
particles in a lattice always leads to crystals.
 The particles can be atoms, ions, or molecules.

--- Page 60 ---
Q
1 The particles in solids usually form a regular lattice.  
Explain what that means, in your own words.
2 Which type of particles make up the lattice, in:
 a
 ionic compounds?
  
b
 molecular compounds?
3 Solid sodium chloride will not conduct electricity , but a 
solution of sodium chloride will conduct. Explain this.4 A compound melts at 20  8 C.  
 a
  What kind of structur
e do you think it has?  
Why do you think so?
 b
 W
ill it conduct electricity at 25
 8
C? Give a reason.
5  Describe the arrangement of the molecules in ice. How will 
the arrangement change as the ice warms up?
59Atoms combining
The properties of ionic compounds
1  Ionic compounds have high melting and boiling points.   
For example:
  This is because the ionic bonds are very strong. It takes a lot of heat 
energy to break up the lattice. So ionic compounds are solid at room temperature.
  Note that magnesium oxide has a far higher melting and boiling point than sodium chloride does. This is because its ions have double the charge (Mg
21 and O22 compared with Na1 and Cl2), so its ionic bonds 
are stronger.
2
  Ionic compounds are usually soluble in water
.  
The water molecules are able to separate the ions from each other.  The ions then move apart, surrounded by water molecules. 
 
3
  Ionic compounds conduct electricity
, when melted or dissolved in 
water.  A solid ionic compound will not conduct electricity. But when it melts, or dissolves in water, the ions become free to move. Since they are charged, they can then conduct electricity.
The properties of covalent compounds
1  Molecular covalent compounds have low melting and boiling points.   
For example:
 
 This is because the attraction between the molecules is low
. So it does 
not take much energy to break up the lattice and separate them from each other. That explains why many molecular compounds are liquids or gases at room temperature – and why many of the liquids are volatile (evaporate easily).
2
  Covalent compounds tend to be insoluble in water
.  
But they do dissolve in some solvents, for example tetrachloromethane.
3
  Covalent compounds do not conduct electricity
.  
There are no charged particles, so they cannot conduct.Compound Melting point  / °C Boiling point  / °C
sodium chloride, NaCl  
 801 1413
magnesium oxide, MgO 2852 3600
Compound Melting point  / °C Boiling point  / °C
carbon monoxide, CO 2
199 2191
hexane, C6H14  295   69
 Magnesium oxide is used to line 
fur
naces in steel works, because of its 
high melting point, 2852
 °C. 
 
(By contrast, iron melts at 1538
 °C.)
 The covalent compound carbon 
monoxide is formed when petr
ol burns 
in the limited supply of air in a car 
engine. And it is poisonous.

--- Page 61 ---
4.8
Not all covalent solids are molecular
In all the solids in this table, the atoms are held together by covalent 
bonds. But compare their melting points. What do you notice?
The first three substances are molecular solids. Their molecules are held 
in a lattice by weak forces – so the solids melt easily, at low temperatures.
But diamond and silica are different. Their melting points show that they 
are not molecular solids with weak lattices. In fact they exist as giant covalent structures, or macromolecules.
Diamond – a giant covalent structure
Diamond is made of carbon atoms, held in a strong lattice:
Diamond has these properties:
1
  It is very hard, because each atom is held in place by four strong 
covalent bonds. In fact it is the hardest substance on Earth.
2
 For the same reason it has a very high melting point, 3550
 8
C.
3
  It can’
t conduct electricity because there are no ions or free electrons to 
carry the charge.
Silica is similar to diamond
Silica, SiO2, occurs naturally as quartz, the main mineral in sand.  
Like diamond, it forms a giant covalent structure, as shown on the right. 
Each silicon atom bonds covalently to four oxygen atoms. And each 
oxygen atom bonds covalently to two silicon atoms. The result is a very hard substance with a melting point of 1710
 8
C. Substance Melting point  /  °C
ice 0
phosphorus 44
sulfur 115
silicon dioxide (silica) 1710
carbon (as diamond) 3550Atoms combining
60
Giant covalent structures
the centre atom
forms four bonds
tetrahedralin shapeC
CC
CCstrongcovalentbonds
A carbon atom forms covalent 
bonds to four others, as shown above. Each outer atom then bonds to three more, and so on.Eventually billions of carbon atoms are bonded together, in a giant covalent structure. This shows just a very tiny part of it.The result is a single crystal of diamond. This one has been cut, shaped, and polished, to make it sparkle.
silicon 
atom
oxygen 
atom
 Silicon dioxide is made up of oxygen 
atoms  and silicon atoms . Billions of 
them bond together like this, to give a 
giant structure.
 Diamond: so har
d that it is used to 
edge wheels for cutting stone.


--- Page 62 ---
Graphite – a very different giant structure
Like diamond, graphite is made only of carbon atoms. So diamond and 
graphite are allotropes of carbon – two forms of the same element.
Diamond is the hardest solid on Earth. But graphite is one of the softest! 
This difference is a result of their very different structures:
Graphite has these properties:
1
  Unlike diamond, it is soft and slippery
. That is because the sheets can 
slide over each other easily.
2  Unlike diamond, it is a good conductor of electricity
. That is because each 
carbon atom has four outer electrons, but forms only three bonds. So the fourth electron is free to move through the graphite, carrying charge.
Making use of these giant structures
Different properties lead to different uses, as this table shows.
Substance Properties Uses
diamond hardest known substance 
does not conductin tools for drilling and cutting 
sparkles when cut for jewellery
graphite soft and slippery as a lubricant for engines and locks
soft and dark in colour for pencil ‘lead’ (mixed with clay)
conducts electricity for electrodes, and connecting brushes 
in generators
silica hard, can scratch things in sandpaperhard, lets light through for making glass and lenseshigh melting point in bricks for lining furnaces
Q
1 The covalent compound ethanol melts at –114  8 C. Is it a 
molecular compound, or a giant structure? Explain.
2 Diamond and graphite ar e allotropes of carbon. What does 
that mean?
3 Why is diamond so har d?  4 Why do diamond and graphite have such very dif ferent 
properties? Draw diagrams to help you explain.
5  a  Explain why silica has a high melting point.
 b
 
  See if you can suggest a r
eason why its melting point is 
lower than diamond’s.
61Atoms combining
C CC
C CC
C CC C
C Cweak
forcesstrong
covalent
bonds
In graphite, each carbon atom 
forms covalent bonds to three  
others. This gives rings of six atoms.The rings form flat sheets that lie on top of each other, held together by weak forces.Under a microscope, you can see the layered structure of graphite quite clearly.
 Pencil ‘lead’ is a mixtur e of graphite 
and clay.

--- Page 63 ---
4.9Atoms combining
62
The bonding in metals
Clues from melting points
Compare these melting points:
The table shows clearly that:
  molecular substances have low melting points.  That is because the 
forces between molecules in the lattice are weak. 
  giant structures such as sodium chloride and diamond have much 
higher melting points.
 That is because the bonds between ions or 
atoms within giant structures are very strong.
Now look at the metals. They too have high melting points – much higher than for carbon dioxide or water. This gives us a clue that they too might be giant structures. And so they are, as you’ll see below.
The structure of metals
In metals, the atoms are packed tightly together in a regular lattice.  The tight packing allows outer electrons to separate from their atoms.  The result is a lattice of ions in a ‘sea’ of electrons that are free to move.
Look at copper:Structure Examples Melting point /  °C
molecular carbon dioxide
  
water256  
0
giant ionic sodium chloride  
magnesium oxide801  
2852
giant covalent diamond  silica3550  1610
metal iron  copper1535  1083
copper ion, Cu2+free electron
2+ 2+ 2+ 2+ 2+
2+ 2+ 2+ 2+ 2+2+ 2+ 2+ 2+ 2+
The copper ions are held together 
by their attraction to the free electrons between them.  The strong forces of attraction  are called metallic bonds.The regular arrangement of ions results in crystals of copper.  This shows the crystals in a piece of copper, magnified 1000 times. (They are all at different angles.)The copper crystals are called grains. A lump of copper like this one consists of millions of grains joined together. You need a microscope to see them.
The metallic bond is the attraction between metal ions and free electrons. 
It is the same with all metals. The ions sit in a lattice, held together by 
their strong attraction to the free electrons. And because the ions are in a regular pattern, metals are crystalline.
 Equipment for measuring melting 
points in the school lab. It can heat 
substances up to 300
 8
C – so no good 
for sodium chloride!
!Delocalised electrons
The electrons that move freely in the 
metal lattice are not tied to any one ion. So they are called delocalised.

--- Page 64 ---
Q
1 Describe in your own wor ds the structure of a metal.
2 What is a metallic bond?
3 What does malleable mean?
4 Explain why metals can be drawn out into wir es without 
breaking. 
5 a Explain why metals can conduct electricity .
 b 
  W
ould you expect molten metals to conduct?  
Give a reason.6  Because metals ar e malleable, we use some of them to 
make saucepans. Give two other examples of uses of metals 
that depend on:
 a
 their malleability
   
b
 their ductility 
 c
 their ability to conduct electricity
7  Mer cury forms ions with a charge of 21. It goes solid 
(freezes) at 239
 8
C. Try drawing a diagram to show the 
structure of solid mercury. 
63Atoms combining
Explaining some key properties of metals
In Unit 3.5 you read about the properties of metals. We can now explain 
some of those properties. Look at these examples. 
1
  Metals usually have high melting points. 
 
That is because it takes a lot of heat energy to break up the lattice, with 
its strong metallic bonds. Copper melts at 1083
 8C, and nickel at 1455
 8C.
  
(But there are exceptions. Sodium melts at only 98
 8C, for example. 
And 
mercury melts at –39
 8
C, so it is a liquid at room temperature.)
2
  Metals are malleable and ductile. 
 
Malleable means they can be bent and pressed into shape. Ductile means they can be drawn out into wires. This is because the layers can slide over each other. This diagram represents any metal lattice:
  The layers can slide without breaking the metallic bond, because the electrons are free to move too. 
4
  Metals are good conductors of electricity
.  
That is because the free electrons can move through the lattice carrying charge, when a voltage is applied across the metal. 
 Silver is the best conductor of all the metals. 
 
 
 Copper is next – but it is used much more than silver
 
because it is cheaper.+ + + + +
+ + + + ++ + + + +force
applied
+ + + + ++ + + + ++ + + + +layer
slides
moving electrons
+ + + + +
+ + + + ++ + + +
 Metals: malleable, ductile, and 
sometimes very glamor
ous – like this 
silver bracelet.
 What uses of metals can you see in this scene?3 Metals are good conductors of heat.   
 
 That is because the free electrons take in heat energy
, 
which makes them move faster. They quickly 
transfer the heat through the metal structure: 

--- Page 65 ---
Checkup on Chapter 4
Questions
Core curriculum
1 This question is about the ionic bond formed 
between the metal lithium (
proton number 3) and 
the non-metal fluorine (proton number 9).
 a
  How many electrons does a lithium atom have? Draw a diagram to show its electron structure. 
 b
  How does a metal atom obtain a stable outer shell of electrons?
 c
  Draw the structure of a lithium ion, and write the symbol for it, showing its charge.
 d
  How many electrons does a fluorine atom have? Draw a diagram to show its electron structure.
 e
  How does a non-metal atom become an ion?
 f
  Draw the structure of a fluoride ion, and write a symbol for it, showing its charge.
 
g
  Draw a diagram to show what happens when a lithium atom reacts with a fluorine atom. 
 h
  W
rite a word equation for the reaction between 
lithium and fluorine.
2
 This diagram represents a 
 
molecule of a certain gas.
 a
 Name the gas, and give its formula.
 b
 What do the symbols  and 3 represent?
 c Which type of bonding holds the atoms together?
 d
  Name another compound with this type of bonding.
3
  Hydrogen bromide is a compound of the two elements hydrogen and bromine. It melts at 
287
 8
C 
and boils at 267
 8
C. It has the same type of bonding 
as hydrogen chloride. 
 a
  Is hydrogen bromide a solid, a liquid, or a gas at room temperature (20
 8
C)?
 
b
  Is hydrogen bromide molecular
, or does it have 
a giant structure? What is your evidence?
 c
 i
  Which type of bond is formed between the hydrogen and bromine atoms, in hydrogen bromide? 
  
ii
  Draw a diagram of the bonding between
 the 
atoms, showing only the outer electrons. 
 d
 W
rite a formula for hydrogen bromide.
 e
 i
  Name two other compounds with bonding similar to that in hydrogen bromide.
  
ii
 W
rite formulae for these two compounds.Revision checklist
Core curriculum
Make sure you can …
 explain the dif ference between:
 
–
 an 
element and a compound
 
–
 a 
compound and a mixture
 say what the signs of a chemical change are
 explain why:
 
–
 atoms of Group 0 elements do not form bonds
 
–
 atoms of other elements do form bonds
 explain the dif ference between an ionic bond and 
a covalent bond 
 draw a diagram to show how an ionic bond forms between atoms of sodium and chlorine  
 explain what a molecule is
 say that non-metal atoms form covalent bonds with each other (except for the noble gas atoms) 
 draw diagrams to show the covalent bonding in:
 
hydrogen
 chlorine
 water
 methane
 hydrogen chloride 
 give three ways in which ionic and molecular compounds dif
fer in their properties, and explain 
these differences 
 describe the giant covalent structures of graphite  
and diamond, and sketch them
 explain how their structures lead to dif ferent uses 
for diamond and graphite, with examples 
Extended curriculum
Make sure you can also …
 show how ionic bonds form between atoms of other metals and non-metals
 describe the lattice structure of ionic compounds
 work out the formulae of ionic compounds, from the charges on the ions
 draw diagrams to show the covalent bonding in nitrogen, oxygen, ammonia, methanol, carbon dioxide, and ethene 
 describe metallic bonding, and draw a sketch for it 
 explain how the structure and bonding in metals enables them to be malleable, ductile, and good conductors of heat and electricity   
 describe the structure of silicon dioxide
 explain why silicon dioxide and diamond have similar properties   
 give examples of uses for silicon dioxideHHN
HAtoms combining
64


--- Page 66 ---
4 These are some properties of substances A to G.
 Substance Melting  
point /
 °CElectrical   
conductivitySolubility  
in water
solid liquid
A –112 poor poor insoluble
B 680 poor good soluble
C –70 poor poor insoluble
D 1495 good good insoluble
E 610 poor good soluble
F 1610 poor poor insoluble
G 660 good good insoluble
 a  Which of the seven substances are metals?   
Give reasons for your choice.
 b
  Which of the substances are ionic compounds? 
Give reasons for your choice.
 c
  T
wo of the substances have very low melting 
points, compared with the rest. Explain why these could not be ionic compounds.
 d
  T
wo of the substances are molecular. Which two 
are they?
 e
 i
  Which substance is a giant covalent structure?
  
  ii
  What other name is used to describe this type of structure? (Hint: starts with 
m.)
 f
 Name the type of bonding found in:
  
i
 B
      
ii
 C
      
iii
 E
      
iv
 F
Extended curriculum
5 Aluminium and nitrogen react to form an ionic   
compound called aluminium nitride. These show 
  
the electron arrangement for the two elements:
   AI N
 a Answer these questions for an aluminium atom.
  
i
 Does it gain or lose electrons, to form an ion?
  
ii
 How many electrons are transferred?
  
iii
 Is the ion formed positive, or negative?
  
iv
 What charge does the ion have?
 
b
 Now repeat 
a, but for a nitrogen atom.
 c
 i
  Give the electron distribution for the ions
 
formed by the two atoms. (2 1 …)
  
ii
  What do you notice about these distributions?
 
Explain it.
 d
  Name another non-metal that will form an ionic compound with aluminium, in the same way as nitrogen does. 6
 Silicon lies directly below carbon in Group IV of the Periodic T
able. Here is some data for silicon, 
carbon (in the form of diamond), and their oxides.
 Substance Symbol or  
formula Melting  
point
 / °CBoiling  
point
 / °C
carbon C 3730 4530
silicon Si 1410 2400
carbon dioxide CO2 (turns to gas  
at 278
 8
C)
silicon dioxide SiO2 1610 2230
 a  In which state are the two elements at room 
temperature (20
 °C)?
 b
  Which type of structure does carbon (diamond) 
have: giant covalent, or molecular?
 c
  Which type of structure would you expect to find in silicon? Give reasons.
 d
  In which state are the two oxides, at room temperature?
 e
 Which type of structure has carbon dioxide?
 f
  Does silicon dioxide have the same structure as carbon dioxide? What is your evidence?
7
 The compound zinc sulfide has a structure like this:
 
sulﬁde ion (S2/H11002)
zinc ion (Zn2/H11001)
 a  Which does the diagram represent: a giant structure, or a molecular structure?  
 b
 Which type of bonding does zinc sulfide have?
 c
 Look carefully at the structure. How many:
  i
 sulfur ions are joined to each zinc ion?
  
ii
 zinc ions are joined to each sulfur ion?
 d
 i
 
From c, deduce the formula of zinc sulfide.
  
ii
  Is this formula consistent with the charges
 
on the two ions? Explain your answer.
 e
  Name another metal and non-metal that will
 
form a compound with a similar formula.
8
 The properties of metals can be explained by the structure and bonding within the metal lattice. 
 a
 Describe the bonding in metals.
 b
 Use the bonding to explain why metals:
  i
 are good conductors of electricity
  ii
 are malleable and flexible Atoms combining
65

--- Page 67 ---
5.1
The names of compounds
Many compounds contain just two elements. If you know which elements 
they are, you can usually name the compound. Just follow these rules:
  When the compound contains a metal and a non-metal:
 –
  the name of the metal is given first
 –
  and then the name of the non-metal, but ending with -
ide.
 Examples
: sodium chloride, magnesium oxide, iron sulfide.
  When the compound is made of two non-metals:
 –
  if one is hydrogen, that is named first
 –
  otherwise the one with the lower group number comes first
 –
  and then the name of the other non-metal, ending with -
ide.
 Examples
: hydrogen chloride, carbon dioxide.
But some compounds have ‘everyday’ names that give you no clue about the elements in them. Water, methane, and ammonia are examples.  You just have to remember their formulae! 
Finding formulae from the structure of compounds
Every compound has a formula as well as a name. The formula is made up of the symbols for the elements, and often has numbers too.
The formula of a compound is related to its structure. For example:
 That very common compound, water. 
Your body is full of it. Which elements 
does it contain?
Note the difference:
  In giant structures like sodium chloride and silicon dioxide, the 
formula tells you the 
ratio of the ions or atoms in the compound.
  In a molecular compound, the formula tells you exactly how many 
atoms are bonded together in each molecule.
Valency
But you don’t need to draw the structure of a compound to work out its formula. You can work it out quickly if you know the valency of the elements: 
The valency of an element is the number of electrons its atoms lose, 
gain or share, to form a compound.silicon
atom 
oxygen
atom 
Sodium chloride forms a giant 
structure with one sodium ion for every chloride ion. So its formula  is NaCl.Water is made up of molecules in which two hydrogen atoms are bonded to an oxygen atom. So its formula is H
2O.Silicon dioxide (silica) forms a giant structure in which there are two oxygen atoms for every silicon atom. So its formula is SiO
2.sodium ion 
chloride ion Reacting masses, and chemical equations
66
The names and formulae of compounds

--- Page 68 ---
 Hydr ogen sulfide is a very poisonous 
colourless gas. It smells of rotten eggs.Look at this table. (You can check the groups in the Periodic Table on 
page 31.)
Elements In forming a compound,  
the atoms …So the valency of the 
element is …Examples of compounds formed   
(those in blue are covalent, with shared 
electrons)
Group I lose 1 electron 1 sodium chloride, NaCl
Group II lose 2 electrons 2 magnesium chloride, MgCl2
Group III lose 3 electrons 3 aluminium chloride, AlCl3
Group IV share 4 electrons 4 methane, CH4
Group V gain or share 3 electrons 3 ammonia, NH3
Group VI gain or share 2 electrons 2 magnesium oxide, MgO; water, H2O
Group VII gain or share 1 electron 1 sodium chloride, NaCl; hydrogen chloride, HCl
Group 0 (do not form compounds) – none
hydrogen lose or share 1 electron 1 hydrogen bromide, HBr
transition elementscan lose different numbers  of electronsvariable iron
 (II) chloride, FeCl2; iron  (III) chloride, FeCl3
copper  (I) chloride, CuCl; copper  (II) chloride, CuCl2
Writing formulae using valencies 
This is how to write the formula of a compound, using valencies: 
1
 W
rite down the valencies of the two elements.
2  W
rite down their symbols, in the same order as the elements in the name.
3
 Add numbers after the symbols if you need to, to balance the valencies.
Example 1
 What is the formula of hydrogen sulfide?
1
 V
alencies: hydrogen, 1; sulfur (Group VI), 2
2
 
HS (valencies not balanced)
3
 The formula is 
H2S (2 3 1 and 2, so the valencies are now balanced)
Example 2
 What is the formula of aluminium oxide?
1
 
Valencies: aluminium (Group III), 3; oxygen (Group VI), 2
2
 
AlO (valencies not balanced)
3
  The formula is 
Al2O3 (2 3 3 and 3 3 2, so the valencies are now 
balanced)
Writing formulae by balancing charges 
In an ionic compound, the total charge is zero. So you can also work out 
the formula of an ionic compound by balancing the charges on its ions.  To find out how to do this, turn to Unit 4.4.
Q
The Periodic Table on page 31 will help you with these.
1 W rite the chemical name for water (ending in -ide).
2 Name the compounds containing only these elements:
 a
 sodium and fluorine
  
b
 fluorine and hydr
ogen
 c
 sulfur and hydr
ogen
  
d
 br
omine and beryllium 
3 Why does silica have the formula SiO2?4 Decide whether this formula is corr ect. If it is not correct, 
 write it corr
ectly.
 a
 
HBr2 b  ClNa  c  Cl3Ca d  Ba2O
5 W rite the correct formula for barium iodide.
6 See if you can give a name and formula for a compound 
that forms when phosphorus r
eacts with chlorine.
67Reacting masses, and chemical equations

--- Page 69 ---
5.2
O O OO
1 atom of 
carbon/H11001
1 molecule ofoxygen1 molecule ofcarbon dioxide
H HO O O O HH HH HH
2 molecules ofhydrogen2 molecules ofwater1 molecule ofoxygen/H11001
 The r eaction between hydrogen and 
oxygen gives out so much energy that it 
is used to power rockets. The reactants are carried as liquids in the fuel tanks. 
!Note
Reactants are sometimes called 
reagents.Reacting masses, and chemical equations
68
Equations for chemical reactions
Equations for two sample reactions
1  The reaction between carbon and oxygen   When carbon is heated 
in oxygen, they react together to form carbon dioxide. Carbon and 
oxygen are the 
reactants. Carbon dioxide is the product. 
You could show the reaction using a diagram, like this:
 or 
by a word equation, like this:
 
carbon 1 oxygen
  carbon dioxide
 or by a 
symbol equation, which gives symbols and formulae:
 
C 1 O2  CO2
2  The reaction between hydrogen and oxygen   Hydrogen  
and oxygen react together to give water. The diagram is:
 and 
you can use it to write the symbol equation:
 
2H2 1 O2  2H2O
Symbol equations must be balanced
Now look at the number of atoms on each side of this equation: 
 
2H2 1 O2  2H2O
On the left:4 hydrogen atoms2 oxygen atoms On the right:4 hydrogen atoms2 oxygen atoms
The number of each type of atoms is the same on both sides of the arrow. This is because atoms do not disappear during a reaction – they are just rearranged, as shown in the diagram of the molecules, in 2 above.
When the number of each type of atom is the same on both sides, the 
symbol equation is balanced. If it is not balanced, it is not correct.
Adding state symbols
Reactants and products may be solids, liquids, gases, or in solution.  You can show their states by adding state symbols to the equations:
 
(s) for solid
  (
l) for liquid
 
(g) for gas
  (
aq) for aqueous solution (solution in water)
For the two reactions above, the equations with state symbols are:
 C (
s) 1 O2 (g)  CO2 (g)
 
2H2 (g) 1 O2 (g)  2H2 O (l)

--- Page 70 ---
 Calcium chloride absorbs water , so it 
is used to dry gases. The glass cylinder 
above is packed with calcium chloride, and the gas is piped up through it.
 Magnesium bur ning in oxygen.
Q
1 What do 1 and  mean, in an equation?
2 Balance the following equations:
 a
 Na (
s) 1 Cl2 (g)  NaCl (s)
 b
 
H2 (g) 1 I2 (g)  HI (g)
 c
 Na (
s) 1 H2O (l)  NaOH (aq) 1 H2 (g) d
 
NH3 (g)  N2 (g) 1 H2 (g)
 e
 C (
s) 1 CO2 (g)  CO (g)
 f
 Al (
s) 1 O2 (g)  Al2O3 (s)
3 Aluminium bur ns in chlorine to form aluminium chloride, 
AlCl3, a solid. Write a balanced equation for the reaction.
69Reacting masses, and chemical equations
How to write the equation for a reaction
These are the steps to follow, when writing an equation:
1
 W
rite the equation in words.
2
 Now write it using symbols. Make sure all the formulae are correct.
3
 Check that the equation is balanced, for each type of atom in turn.
 Make sure you do not change any formulae.
4
 Add the state symbols.
Example 1
 Calcium burns in chlorine to form calcium chloride, a solid. 
W
rite an equation for the reaction, using the steps above.
1
 
calcium 1 chlorine  calcium chloride
2
  Ca 
 1	 Cl2  CaCl2
3 Ca:  1 atom on the left and 1 atom on the right.
 Cl: 
 2 atoms on the left and 2 atoms on the right.
 The equation is balanced.
4
 Ca (
s)
 1
 
Cl2 (g)  CaCl2 (s)
Example 2
 Hydrogen chloride is formed by burning hydrogen in 
chlorine. W
rite an equation for the reaction.
1
 
hydrogen 1 chlorine  hydrogen chloride
2
  H2 1  Cl2  HCl
3
 
H:
 2 atoms on the left and 1 atom on the right.
 
Cl:
 2 atoms on the left and 1 atom on the right.
  The equation is 
not balanced. It needs another molecule of hydrogen 
chloride on the right. So a 2 is put in front of the HCl.
 
H2 1 Cl2  2HCl
 The equation is now balanced. Do you agree?
4
 
H2 (g) 1 Cl2 (g)    2HCl ( g)
Example 3
 Magnesium burns in oxygen to form magnesium oxide, 
a
 white solid. Write an equation for the reaction.
1
 
magnesium 1 oxygen  magnesium oxide
2
  Mg
 1
 O2  MgO
3
 Mg: 1 atom on the left and 1 atom on the right.
 O:
  
 2 atoms on the left and 1 atom on the right.
 The equation is 
not balanced. Try this:
 
Mg 1 O2  2MgO  (The 2 goes in front of the MgO.)
 Another magnesium atom is now needed on the left:
 
2Mg 1 O2  2MgO
 The equation is balanced.
4
 2Mg (
s) 1 O2 (g)  2MgO (s)

--- Page 71 ---
5.3
!Ar for chlorine
Using the formula on the left, the 
relative atomic mass of chlorine …
5 75% 3 35 1 25% 3 375 
  75 ____ 100   3 35 1   25 ____ 100   3 37
 (changing % to fractions)
5
	
26.25 1 9.25
5 35.5Reacting masses, and chemical equations
70
The masses of atoms, molecules, and ions
Relative atomic mass
A single atom weighs hardly anything. You can’t use scales to weigh it. 
But scientists do need a way to compare the masses of atoms. So this is what they did.
First, they chose an atom of carbon-12 to be the standard atom. They 
fixed its mass as exactly 12 atomic mass units. (It has 6 protons and 6 neutrons, as shown on the right. They ignored the electrons.)
Then they compared all the other atoms with this standard atom, in a 
machine called a mass spectrometer, and found values for their masses. Like this:
This is the standard atom,
 12   6 C or 
carbon-12. Its mass is taken as 
exactly 12.This magnesium atom is twice  as heavy as the carbon-12 atom. So its mass is 24.6 protons
6 electrons6 neutrons
 An atom of carbon-12. It is the main 
isotope of carbon. (See page 
34.)
This hydrogen atom has only one-
twelfth the mass of the carbon-12 atom. So its mass is 1.
this one has
a mass of 35
this one hasa mass of 37
 The two isotopes of chlorine.The mass of an atom compared with the carbon-12 atom is called its 
relative atomic mass,  or Ar. 
The small r  stands for relative to the mass of a carbon-12 atom.
So the Ar of hydrogen is 1, and the Ar of magnesium is 24.
Ar and isotopes
As you saw on page 34, the atoms of an element are not always identical. Some may have extra neutrons. Different atoms of the same element are called isotopes. Chlorine has two isotopes:
Name Protons Neutrons Nucleon number % of chlorine atoms 
like this
chlorine-35 17 18 35 75%
chlorine-37 17 20 37 25%
We need to take all the natural isotopes of an element into account, to work out the relative atomic mass. This is the formula to use:
relative atomic mass (A
r) of an element 5
   (% 
3 nucleon number for the first isotope)
    1
  (% 
3 
 nucleon number for the second isotope)
 
… and so on, for all its natural isotopes
The calculation for chlorine is given on the right. It shows that the relative 
atomic mass of chlorine is 35.5.
The relative atomic mass (Ar) of an element is the average mass of its 
isotopes compared to an atom of carbon-12.For most elements, A
r is very close to a whole number. It is usually 
rounded off to a whole number, to make calculations easier.

--- Page 72 ---
mass of ion /H11005
mass of its atom
Q
1 a What does relative atomic mass mean? 
 b
 Why does it have the wor
d relative?
2 What is the Ar of the iodide ion, I  –?
3 The r elative molecular mass and formula mass are both 
called Mr for short. What is the difference between them?4 W ork out the Mr for each of these, and say whether it is the 
relative molecular mass or the relative formula mass:
 a
 oxygen, O2 b  iodine, I2 c  methane, CH4
 d chlorine, Cl2 e  butane, C4H10 f ethanol, C2H5OH
 g
 ammonium sulfate (NH4)2SO4
!Finding the mass of an ion
mass of sodium atom 5 23, so  
mass of sodium ion 5 23  since a sodium ion is just a sodium atom minus an electron (which has negligible mass).
An ion has the same mass as the 
atom from which it is made.
71Reacting masses, and chemical equations
Hydrogen gas is made of molecules. 
Each molecule contains 2 hydrogen atoms, so its mass is 2. (2 3  1 5 2)The formula for water is H
2O.  
Each water molecule contains 2 hydrogen atoms and 1 oxygen atom, so its mass is 18. (2 3  1 1 16 5  18)Sodium chloride (NaCl) forms a giant structure with 1 sodium ion for every chloride ion. So the mass of a ‘unit’ of sodium chloride is 58.5. (23 1 35.5 5 58.5)Ar values for some common elements
Element Symbol Ar Element Symbol Ar
hydrogen H 1 chlorine Cl 35.5
carbon C 12 potassium K 39
nitrogen N 14 calcium Ca 40
oxygen O 16 iron Fe 56
sodium Na 23 copper Cu 64
magnesium Mg 24 zinc Zn 65
sulfur S 32 iodine I 127
Finding the masses of molecules and ions
Using Ar values, it is easy to work out the mass of any molecule or group of 
ions. Read the blue panel on the right above, then look at these examples:
If the substance is made of molecules, its mass found in this way is called 
the relative molecular mass, or Mr. So the Mr for hydrogen is 2, and for 
water is 18. 
But if the substance is made of ions, its mass is called the relative 
formula mass, which is also Mr for short. So the Mr for NaCl is 58.5.
This table gives two more examples of how to calculate Mr values.
Substance Formula Atoms in 
formulaAr of atoms Mr
ammonia NH3 1N
3HN 5 14H 5 1  1 3 14 5 143 3 1
  5
   3
 T
otal
 5
 17
magnesium nitrate Mg(NO3)2 1Mg
2N
6O Mg  5  24
 N
 5
 14
 O
 5
 161 3 24  5    24
2 3 14
 5
   28
6 3 16
 5
   96
 T
otal
 5
 148

--- Page 73 ---
5.4
Reacting masses, and chemical equations
72
Some calculations about masses and %
Two laws of chemistry
If you know the actual amounts of two substances that react, you can:
  predict other amounts that will react
  say how much product will form. 
Y
ou just need to remember these two laws of chemistry:
1
  Elements always react in the same ratio, to form a given compound.
 
 For example, when carbon burns in oxygen to form carbon dioxide:
 6 g
 of carbon combines with 16 g of oxygen, so
 12 g
 of carbon will combine with 32 g of oxygen, and so on.
2
 The total mass does not change, during a chemical reaction.
 So t
otal mass of reactants 5 total mass of products.
 So 
6 g of carbon and 16 g of oxygen give 22 g of carbon dioxide.
 12 g
 of carbon and 32 g of oxygen give 44 g of carbon dioxide.
Calculating quantities 
Calculating quantities is quite easy, using the laws above.
Example
 64 g of copper reacts with 16 g of oxygen to 
give the black 
compound copper(II) oxide. a
 What mass of copper will react with 32 g of oxygen?
 64 g of copper reacts with 16 g of oxygen, so
 2 
3 64 g or 128 g of copper will react with 32 g of oxygen.
b
 What mass of oxygen will react with 32 g of copper?
 
 16 g of oxygen reacts with 64 g of copper
, so
 
  16 ___ 2   or 8 g of oxygen will react with 32 g of copper.
c
 What mass of copper(II) oxide will be formed, in 
b?
 40 g
 of copper(II)
 
oxide will be formed. (32 1 8 5 40)
d
 How much copper and oxygen will give 8 g of copper(II)
 
oxide?
 64 g of copper and 16 g of oxygen give 80 g of copper(II) oxide, so
 
  64 ___ 10   of copper and   16 ___ 10   g of oxygen will give 8 g of copper(II) oxide, so
 6.4 g of copper 
and 1.6 g of oxygen are needed.
Percentages: a reminder
Calculations in chemistry often involve percentages. Remember:
  The full amount of anything is 100%.
  T o change a fraction to a %, just multiply it by 100. 
Example 1
 Change the fractions 
  1 __ 2   and   18 ___ 25   to percentages.
  1 __ 2   3 100 5 50%    18 ___ 25   3 100 5 72%
Example 2
 Give 19 % as a fraction.
19% 
5 
  19 ____ 100   A model of the carbon dioxide  
molecule. The amounts of carbon and 
oxygen that react to give this compound are always in the same ratio.
 The Fr ench scientist Antoine Lavoisier 
(1743
 –
 1794) was the first to state that 
the total mass does not change, during a r
eaction. He was executed during the 
French Revolution, when he was 51.

--- Page 74 ---
Q
1 Magnesium bur ns in chlorine to give magnesium chloride, 
 
MgCl2. In an experiment, 24 g of magnesium was found to
 r
eact with 71 g of chlorine. 
 a
 How much magnesium chloride was obtained in the
  
experiment? 
 b
 How much chlorine will r
eact with 12 g of magnesium?
 c
 How much magnesium chloride will form, in 
b?2 Methane has the formula CH4. Work out the % of carbon 
and hydrogen in it. (Ar : C 5 12, H 5 1)
3 In an experiment, a sample of lead(II) br omide was made.  
It weighed 15 g. But the sample was found to be impure. 
 In fact it contained only 13.5 g of lead(II) br
omide.
 a
 Calculate the % purity of the sample.
 b
 What mass of impurity was pr
esent in the sample?
!Mr for sulfur dioxide, SO2
Ar : S 5 32, O 5 16.
So the Mr is:
1 S
  5
 32
2 O 5 2 3 16
 5
 32
  T
otal
 5
 64
73Reacting masses, and chemical equations
 Copper of high purity is needed for 
cir
cuit boards like this one, in computers.Calculating the percentage composition of a compound
The percentage composition of a compound tells you how much of each 
element it contains, as a percentage of the total mass. This is how to work it out:
1
 W
rite down the formula of the compound.
2
 
Using Ar values, work out its molecular or formula mass (Mr).
3
 W
rite the mass of the element as a fraction of the Mr.
4
 Multiply the fraction by 100, to give a percentage.
Example
 Calculate the percentage of oxygen in sulfur dioxide. 
1
 The formula of sulfur dioxide is SO2.
2
 
The Mr of the compound is 64, as shown on the right.
3
 Mass of oxygen as a fraction of the total
 5	 		32 ___ 64  
4
 Mass of oxygen as a percentage of the total
 5   32 ___ 64   × 100 5 50% 
 So the compound is 50% oxygen.
  This means it is also 50% sulfur (100% 
2 50% 5 50%).
Calculating % purity
A pure substance has nothing else mixed with it. 
But substances often contain unwanted substances, or impurities.Purity is usually given as a percentage. This is how to work it out:
% purity of a substance 5 
  mass of pure substance in it    _____________________________   total mass   3 100%
Example
 Impure copper is refined (purified), to obtain pure copper for 
use in computers. 20 tonnes of copper gave 18 tonnes of pure copper
, on 
refining. 
a
 What was the % purity of the copper before refining?
 % purity of the copper
 5   18 tonnes __________ 20 tonnes   3 100% 5 90%
 So the copper was 
90% pure.
b
 How much pure copper will 50 tonnes of the impure copper give?
 The impure copper is 90% pure.
 90% is 
  90 ____ 100  .
  So 50 tonnes of it will give 
  90 ____ 100   3 50 tonnes or 45 tonnes of pure 
copper.

--- Page 75 ---
Revision checklist
Core curriculum
Make sure you can …
 name a simple compound, when you are given the 
names of the two elements that form it
 work out the formula of a compound from a drawing of its structure
 work out the formula of a simple compound when  
you know the two elements in it, by balancing their valencies
 work out the formula of an ionic compound by  
balancing the charges of the ions, so that the total charge is zero
 write the equation for a reaction:
 –
 as a word equation
 –
 as a 
symbol equation 
 balance a symbol equation
 say what the state symbols mean: ( s), (l), (g), (aq)
 define aqueous 
 explain that the carbon-12 atom is taken as the standard, for working out masses of atoms 
 say what these two symbols mean:  Ar Mr
 work out Mr values, given the Ar values
 explain the dif ference between relative formula 
mass and relative molecular mass (both known as M
r for short)
 explain that the Ar value of an element is the 
average value for all its isotopes 
 predict other amounts of reactants that will react, when you are given some actual amounts
 calculate: 
 –
  the mass of a product, when you are given the
 
masses of the reactants that combine to form it 
 –
  the percentage of an element in a compound, using the formula and 
Ar values
 –
  the percentage purity of a substance, when you
 
are given the total mass of the impure substance, and the amount of the pure substance in itQuestions
Core curriculum
If you are not sure about symbols for the elements, you can check the Periodic Table on page 314.
 1
 W
rite the formulae for these compounds:
  a
 
water
 b
 carbon monoxide
  c
 carbon dioxide
 d
 sulfur dioxide
  e
 sulfur trioxide
 f
 sodium chloride
  g
 magnesium chloride
 h
 hydrogen chloride
  i
 
methane
 j
 
ammonia
 2
  Y
ou can work out the formula of a compound 
from the ratio of the different atoms in it. 
 
  Sodium carbonate has the formula Na2CO3 
because it contains 2 atoms of sodium for every 1 atom of carbon and 3 atoms of oxygen.
  Deduce the formula for each compound 
a to h:
Compound Ratio in which the atoms 
are combined in it
alead oxide 1 of lead, 2 of oxygen
blead oxide 3 of lead, 4 of oxygen
cpotassium nitrate 1 of potassium,  
1 of nitrogen, 3 of oxygen
dnitrogen oxide 2 of nitrogen,  
1 of oxygen
enitrogen oxide 2 of nitrogen,  
4 of oxygen
fsodium hydrogen carbonate1 of sodium, 1 of hydrogen,  1 of carbon, 3 of oxygen
gsodium sulfate 2 of sodium, 1 of sulfur, 4 of 
oxygen
h sodium thiosulfate 2 of sodium, 2 of sulfur,  
3 of oxygen
 3  For each compound, write down the ratio of 
atoms present:
  a
 copper(II) oxide, CuO
  b
 copper(I) oxide,
 Cu2O
  c
 aluminium chloride, AlCl3
  d  nitric acid, HNO3
  e  calcium hydroxide, Ca(OH)2
  f  ethanoic acid,  CH3COOH
  g
 ammonium nitrate, NH4NO3
  h  ammonium sulfate, (NH4)2SO4
  i  sodium phosphate, Na3(PO4)2
  j  hydrated iron(II) sulfate,  FeSO4.7H2O 
  k
 hydrated cobalt(II) chloride, 
CoCl2.6H2O
Checkup on Chapter 5Reacting masses, and chemical equations
74


--- Page 76 ---
 4  W rite the chemical formulae for the compounds 
with the structures shown below:
HB r a
HO O H c
NNH
HHHe
SO g
OH HOO
S
OO
H HOCl Cl
ClP b
HC CH d
f
hFF
FFXeFF
 5  This shows the structure of 
an ionic compound.
  a
 Name the compound.
  b
  What is the simplest formula for it?
 6
  This shows the structure of a molecular compound.
  a
 Name the compound.
  b
 What is the simplest formula 
for it?
 7
  W
rite these as word equations:
  a
 
Zn 1 2HCl  ZnCl2 1 H2
  b  Na2CO3 1 H2SO4  Na2SO4 1 CO2 1 H2O
  c
 
2Mg 1 CO2  2MgO 1 C
  d
 
ZnO 1 C  Zn 1 CO
  e
 
Cl2 1 2NaBr  2NaCl 1 Br2
  f  CuO 1 2HNO3  Cu(NO3)2 1 H2O
 8
 Balance these equations:
  a
 N2 1 ... O2  ... NO2
  b  K2CO3 1 ... HCl  ... KCl 1 CO2 1 H2O
  c
 
C3H8 1 ... O2  ... CO2 1 4H2O
  d
 
Fe2O3 1 ...CO  ...Fe 1 ...CO2
  e  Ca(OH)2 1 ... HCl  CaCl2 1 ... H2O
  f
 
2Al 1 ... HCl  2AlCl3 1 ... H2
 9 Copy and complete these equations:
  a
 
MgSO4 1 ........  MgSO4.6H2O
  b
 ...
 C 1 ........  2CO
  c
 
2CuO 1 C  2Cu 1 ........
  d
 
C2H6  ........ 1 H2
  e  ZnO 1 C  Zn 1 ........
  f
 
NiCO3  NiO 1 ........    
  g
 
CO2 1 ........  CH4 1 O2
  h  NaOH 1 HNO3  NaNO3 1 ........
  i
 
C2H6  C2H4 1 ........10
  Calculate 
Mr for these compounds.
  
(Ar values are given at the top of page 315.)
  a
 water
, H2O
  b
 ammonia, NH3
  c  ethanol, CH3CH2OH
  d
 sulfur trioxide,
 SO3
  e  sulfuric acid, H2SO4
  f  hydrogen chloride, HCl
  g
 phosphorus(V) oxide, P2O5
 11  Calculate the relative formula mass for these ionic 
compounds. (
Ar values are given on page 315.)
  a
 magnesium oxide, MgO
  b
 lead sulfide, PbS
  c
 calcium fluoride, CaF2
  d  sodium chloride,  NaCl
  e
 silver nitrate,
 AgNO3
  f  ammonium sulfate, (NH4)2SO4
  g  potassium carbonate, K2CO3
  h  hydrated iron(II) sulfate, FeSO4.7H2O
 1
2
  Iron reacts with excess sulfuric acid to give 
iron(II) sulfate. The equation for the reaction is:
  Fe 
1 H2SO4  FeSO4 1 H2
  5  g of iron gives 13.6 g of iron(II) sulfate.
  a
  Using excess acid, h
ow much iron(II) sulfate 
can be obtained from:
   i
 10 g of iron?
 ii
 1 g of iron?
  b
  How much iron will be needed to make 136 g 
of iron(II) sulfate?
  c
  A 10 g sample of impure iron(II) sulfate 
contains 8 g of iron(II) sulfate. Calculate the percentage purity of the iron(II) sulfate.
1
3
  Aluminium is extracted from the ore bauxite, 
which is impure aluminium oxide. 
 
1 tonne (1000 kg) of the ore was found to have  this composition:
  
aluminium oxide 825 kg
  
iron(III) oxide 100 kg
  
sand 75 kg
  a
 What percentage of this ore is impurities? 
  b
 1 tonne of the ore gives 
437 kg of aluminium.
   i
  How much aluminium will be obtained from 
5 tonnes of the ore?
   ii
 What mass of sand is in this 5 tonnes?
  c
  What will the percentage of aluminium oxide 
in
 the ore be, if all the iron(III) oxide is 
removed, leaving only the aluminium oxide  and sand?Cl/H11002 Cl/H11002
Cl/H11002
Ca2/H11001Cl/H11002Ca2/H11001Cl/H11002 Cl/H11002
Cl/H11002
Ca2/H11001Cl/H11002Ca2/H11001
OO
OP P
OPP
O
OReacting masses, and chemical equations
75

--- Page 77 ---
6.1Using moles
76
The mole
What is a mole?
As you saw on page 70, the masses of atoms are found by comparing  
them with the carbon-12 atom: 
A mole of a substance is the amount that contains the same number 
of units as the number of carbon atoms in 12 grams of carbon-12.  
These units can be atoms, or molecules, or ions, as you will see.
 
The Avogadro constant
Thanks to the work of the Italian scientist Avogadro, we know that 12 g of carbon-12 contains 602 000 000 000 000 000 000 000 carbon atoms!
This huge number is called the Avogadro constant. 
It is written in a short way as 6.02 3 10
23. (The 1023 tells you to move the 
decimal point 23 places to the right, to get the full number.)
So 1 mole of magnesium atoms contains 6.02 3 1023 magnesium atoms.
More examples of moles
Sodium is made of 
single sodium atoms. Its symbol is Na.Its A
r is 23.
This is 23 grams of sodium. It contains 6.02 3 10
23 sodium 
atoms, or 1 mole of sodiumatoms.This is 254 grams of iodine.  It contains 6.02 3 10
23 iodine 
molecules, or 1 mole of iodine molecules.The beaker contains 18 grams  
of water, or 6.02 3 10
23 water 
molecules, or 1 mole of water molecules.Iodine is made of iodine molecules. Its formula is I
2. 
Its Mr is 254.Water is made of water molecules. Its formula is H
2O. 
Its Mr is 18.This is an atom of carbon-12.  It is chosen as the standard atom. Its A
r is taken as 12. Then other 
atoms are compared with it.This is a magnesium atom. It is twice as heavy as a carbon-12 atom, so its A
r is 24.
So it follows that …… 24 g of magnesium contains the same number of atoms as 12 g of carbon-12. 24 g of magnesium is called a mole of magnesium atoms.
Na
So you can see that:One mole of a substance is obtained by weighing out the A
r or Mr of 
the substance, in grams.carbon-12 magnesium

--- Page 78 ---
77Using moles
 Cover the one you want to find –  
and you will see how to calculate it.Finding the mass of a mole
You can find the mass of one mole of any substance by these steps:
1
 W
rite down the symbol or formula of the substance.
2
 Find its 
Ar or Mr .
3
 Express that mass in grams (g).
This table shows three more examples:
Substance Symbol or formula Ar Mr Mass of 1 mole
helium He He 5 4 exists as single atoms 4 grams
oxygen O2 O 5 16 2 3 16 5 32 32 grams
ethanol C2H5OH C 5 12
H 5 
 1
O 
5 162 3 12 5 24
6 3 1
  
5 
 6
1 
3 16 5 16
46 46 grams
mass (g)
mass of 1 mole /H11003 no of moles
 Ar /H11005 80
Mr /H11005 160Br Br
 Ar /H11005 16
Mr /H11005 32OO
Q
1 How many atoms ar e in 1 mole of atoms?
2 How many molecules ar e in 1 mole of molecules?
3 What name is given to the number 6.02 3 10  23?
4 Find the mass of 1 mole of:
 a
 hydr
ogen atoms
 b
 iodine atoms
 c
 chlorine atoms
 d
 chlorine molecules
5 Find the mass of 2 moles of:
 a
 oxygen atoms
     b
 oxygen molecules6 Find the mass of 3 moles of ethanol, C2H5OH.
7 How many moles of molecules ar e there in:
 a
 18 grams of hydr
ogen, H2?
 b
 54 grams of water?
8 Sodium chloride is made up of Na1 and Cl  2 ions. 
 a
 How many sodium ions ar
e there in 58.5 g of 
  
sodium chloride?
 (
Ar : Na 5 23; Cl 5 35.5.)
 b
 What is the mass of 1 mole of chloride ions?Some calculations on the mole
These equations will help you:
Mass of a given number of moles 5  mass of 1 mole 3  number of moles
Number of moles in a given mass 5  
  mass  ________________   mass of 1 mole  
 
Example 1
 Calculate the mass of 0.5 moles of bromine atoms. 
The 
Ar of bromine is 80, so 1 mole of bromine atoms has a mass of 80 g. 
So 0.5 moles of bromine atoms has a mass of 0.5 3 80 g, or 40 g.
Example 2
 Calculate the mass of 0.5 moles of bromine molecules.
 
A bromine 
molecule contains 2 atoms, so its Mr is 160. 
So 0.5 moles of bromine molecules has a mass of 0.5 3 160 g, or 80 g.Example 3
 How many moles of oxygen molecules are in 64 g of oxygen?
The 
Mr of oxygen is 32, so 32 g of it is 1 mole.
Therefore 64 g is 64
32 moles, or 2 moles of oxygen molecules.Use the calculation triangle

--- Page 79 ---
6.2Using moles
78
Calculations from equations, using the mole
What an equation tells you
When carbon burns in oxygen, the reaction can be shown as:
or in a short way, using the symbol equation:
 C (
s) 1 O2 ( g)  CO2 ( g)
This equation tells you that:
 1 carbon atom
 reacts with
 1 molecule of oxygen
 to give
 1 molecule of carbon dioxide
Now suppose there 
is 1 mole of carbon atoms. Then we can say that: 
 1 mole of 
 
reacts with 1 mole of
 
to give 1 mole of 
 carbon atoms
 oxygen molecules
          
 carbon dioxide molecules
So from the equation, we can tell how many moles react. 
But moles can be changed to grams, using Ar and Mr.
The Ar values are:  C 5 12, O 5 16. 
So the Mr values are:  O2 5 32, CO2 5 (12 1 32) 5 44, and we can write:
 12 g of carbon
 reacts with
 32 g of oxygen
 to give
 44 g of carbon dioxide
Since substances always react in the same ratio, this also means that:
and so on
.
So we have gained a great deal of information from the equation.
In fact you can obtain the same information from any equation.
From the equation for a reaction you can tell:
 how many moles of each substance take part
 how many grams of each substance take part.
Reminder: the total mass does not change
Look what happens to the total mass, during the reaction above:
 mass of carbon and oxygen at the start:
  12
 g 1 32 g 5 44 g
 mass of carbon dioxide at the end:
  
44 g
The total mass has not changed, during the reaction. This is because 
no atoms have disappeared. They have just been rearranged.
That is one of the two laws of chemistry that you met on page 72:
The total mass does not change, during a chemical reaction. Iron and sulfur reacting: the total 
mass is the same before and after.1 atom of 
carbon/H11001
1 molecule ofoxygen1 molecule ofcarbon dioxideOO O O
 6 g of carbon  reacts with  16 g of oxygen  to give  22 g of carbon dioxide

--- Page 80 ---
79Using moles
Calculating masses from equations 
These are the steps to follow:
1
 W
rite the balanced equation for the reaction. (It gives moles.)
2
 W
rite down the Ar or Mr for each substance that takes part.
3
 
Using Ar or Mr, change the moles in the equation to grams.
4
  Once you know the 
theoretical masses from the equation, you can then 
find any actual mass.
Example
 Hydrogen burns in oxygen to form water
. What mass of oxygen 
is needed for 1 g of hydrogen, and what mass of water is obtained?1
 The equation for the reaction is: 
 2H2 (g)  1  O2 (g)      2H2O (l )
2
 Ar :  H 5 1, O 5 16.    Mr :  H2 5 2,  O2 5 32,  H2O 5 18.
3
 So, for the equation, the amounts in grams are:
 
2H2 (g) 1	O2 (g)  2H2O (l)
 
2 3 2 g
  32 g
      2 
3 18 g
  or
 4 g
  32 g
  36 g
4
 But you start with only 1 g of hydrogen, so the 
actual masses are:
 1 g
 32
 /
 4 g
 36
 /
 4 g
   
or
 1 g
 8 g
 9 g
So 1 
g of hydrogen needs 8 g of oxygen to burn, and gives 9 g of water.
Working out equations, from masses
If you know the actual masses that react, you can work out the equation 
for the reaction. Just change the masses to moles.
Example
 Iron reacts with a solution of copper(II) sulfate (CuSO4 ) to give 
copper and a solution of iron sulfate. The formula for the iron sulfate 
could be either FeSO4 or Fe2(SO4)3. 1.4 g of iron gave 1.6 g of copper.  
Write the correct equation for the reaction.
1
 Ar : Fe 5 56, Cu 5 64.
2
 Change the masses to moles of atoms:
 1.4
56 moles of iron atoms gave 1.6
64 moles of copper atoms, or
 0.025 moles of iron atom
s gave 0.025 moles of copper atoms, so
 1 mole of iron atom
s gave 1 mole of copper atoms.
3
 So the equation for the reaction must be:
 
Fe
 1
 CuSO4  Cu  1	 FeSO4
4 Add the state symbols to complete it:
 Fe (
s)
 1
 CuSO4 (aq)   Cu ( s)  1 	FeSO4 (aq)
Q
1 The r eaction between magnesium and oxygen is:
 
 2Mg (
s) 1 O2 (g)  2MgO (s)
 a
 W
rite a word equation for the reaction.
 b
 How many moles of magnesium atoms r
eact with 
  
1 mole of oxygen molecules?
 c
 
The Ar values are: Mg 5 24, O 5 16.
 
 How many grams of oxygen r
eact with:
  
i
 48 g of magnesium?
  
ii
 12 g of magnesium?2 Copper(II) carbonate br eaks down on heating, like this:
 
CuCO3 (s)  CuO (s) 1 CO2 (g)
 a
 W
rite a word equation for the reaction.
 b
 Find the mass of 1 mole of each substance 
taking part  
 in the 
reaction.
  (
Ar : Cu 5 64, C 5 12, O 5 16.)
 c
 When 31 g of copper(II) carbonate is used:
  
i
 how many grams of carbon dioxide form?
  
ii
 what mass of solid r
emains after heating? These models show how the atoms 
are rearranged, when hydrogen burns in 
oxygen. Which colour is oxygen?
 Iron wool reacting with copper(II) 
sulfate solution. Iron is more reactive than copper so displaces the copper (deep pink) from solution. 


--- Page 81 ---
6.3Using moles
80
Reactions involving gases
A closer look at some gases
Imagine five very large flasks, each with a volume of 24 dm3. Each is filled 
with a different gas. Each gas is at room temperature and pressure, or rtp. 
(We take room temperature and pressure as the standard conditions for 
comparing gases; rtp is 20 °C and 1 atmosphere.)
If you weighed the gas in the five flasks, you would discover something 
amazing. There is exactly 1 mole of each gas!
So we can conclude that:
1 mole of every gas occupies the same volume, at the same 
temperature and pressure. At room temperature and pressure, this volume is 24 dm
3.
This was discovered by Avogadro, in 1811. So it is often called Avogadro’s Law. It does not matter whether a gas exists as atoms or molecules, or whether its atoms are large or small. The law still holds. 
The volume occupied by 1 mole of a gas is called its molar volume. 
The molar volume of a gas is 24 dm
3 at rtp.
!Remember
24 dm3 5 24 litres
 
 5 24 000 cm3
Imagine a ball about 36 cm in  
diameter. Its volume is about 24 dm
3.
Another way to look at it
Look at these two gas jars.  
A is full of nitrogen dioxide, NO2.  
B is full of oxygen, O2. 
The two gas jars have identical volumes, and the gases are at the same temperature and pressure. 
You cannot see the gas molecules – 
let alone count them. But, from Avogadro’s Law, you can say that the two jars contain the same number of molecules.A Bﬂuorine, F2 chlorine, Cl2 nitrogen, N2 oxygen, O2 neon, Ne
ﬂuorine, F2
38 g
(1 mole)  chlorine, Cl2
71 g
(1 mole)  nitrogen, N2
28 g
(1 mole)  oxygen, O2
32 g
(1 mole)  neon, Ne
20 g
(1 mole)  

--- Page 82 ---
81Using moles
Calculating gas volumes from moles and grams
Avogadro’s Law makes it easy to work out the volumes of gases. 
Example 1
 What volume does 0.25 moles of a gas occupy at rtp?
  
1 mole occupies 24 dm3 so  
0.25 moles occupies 0.25 3 24 dm3 5 6 dm3 
so 0.25 moles of any gas occupies 6 dm3 (or 6000 cm3) at rtp.
Example 2
 What volume does 22 g of carbon dioxide occupy at rtp? 
Mr of carbon dioxide 5 44, so  
44 g 
5 1 mole, so
22 g 5 0.5 mole
so the volume occupied 5 0.5 3 24 dm3 5 12 dm3.
Calculating gas volumes from equations
From the equation for a reaction, you can tell how many moles of a gas take part. Then you can use Avogadro’s Law to work out its volume. In these examples, all volumes are measured at rtp.
Example 1
  What volume of hydrogen will react with 24 dm3 of oxygen  
to form water?1
 The equation for the reaction is:
  2H2 (g) 1 O2 (g)  2H2O (l)
2
 So 2 volumes of hydrogen 
react with 1 of oxygen, or  
 2 
3 24 dm3 react  with 24 dm3, so  
 48 dm3 of hydrogen will react.
Example 2
  When sulfur burns in air it forms sulfur dioxide. What
 
volume of this gas is produced when 1 g of sulfur burns? (Ar : S 5 32.)
1
 The equation for the reaction is:
  S (
s) 1 O2 (g)  SO2 (g)
2
  32 g of sulfur atoms 
5 1 mole of sulfur atoms, so 
1 g 5
	1
32	mole or 0.03125 moles of sulfur atoms.
3
  1 mole of sulfur atoms gives 1 mole of sulfur dioxide molecules so
 
0.03125 moles
 give
 0.03125 moles.
4
  1 mole of sulfur dioxide molecules has a volume of 24 dm3 at rtp so  
0.03125 moles has a volume of 0.03125 3 24 dm3 at rtp, or 0.75 dm3. 
So 0.75 dm3 (or 750 cm3) of sulfur dioxide are produced. Cover the one you want to find – 
and you will see how to calculate it.
 Sulfur dioxide is one of the gases 
given out in volcanic eruptions. These 
scientists are collecting gas samples on the slopes of an active volcano.
Q
(Ar : O 5 16, N 5 14, H 5 1, C 5 12.)
1 What does rtp mean? What values does it have?
2 What does molar volume mean, for a gas?
3 What is the molar volume of neon gas at rtp?
4 For any gas, calculate the volume at rtp of:
 a
 7 moles
  
b
 0.5 moles
  
c
 0.001 moles
5 Calculate the volume at rtp of:
 a
 16 g of oxygen (O2)  b 1.7 g of ammonia (NH3)6 Y ou burn 6 grams of carbon in plenty of air: 
 C (
 s
) 1 O2 ( g)  CO2 ( g)
 a
 What volume of gas will form (at rtp)?
 b
 What volume of oxygen will be used up?
7  If you bur n the carbon in limited air, the reaction is  
different: 2C (s) 1 O2 ( g)  2CO (  g )
 a
 What volume of gas will form this time?
 b
 What volume of oxygen will be used up?Volume
at rtp (dm3)
no of moles /H11003 24 dm3
Use the calculation triangle

--- Page 83 ---
6.4Using moles
82
The concentration of a  solution
What does ‘concentration’ mean?
Solution A contains 2.5 grams 
of copper(II) sulfate in 1 dm3 
of water. So its concentration is 2.5 g
 /
 dm3.Solution B contains 25 grams of copper(II) sulfate in 1 dm
3 
of water. So its concentration is 25 g
 /
 dm3.Solution C contains 125 grams of copper(II) sulfate in 0.5 dm
3 
of water. So its concentration is 250 g
 /
 dm3.
The concentration of a solution is the amount of solute, in grams or moles, that is dissolved in 1 dm
3 of solution.
Finding the concentration in moles
Example  Find the concentrations of A and C above, in moles per dm3.
First, change the mass of the solute to moles.  The formula mass of copper(II) sulfate is 250, as shown on the right. So 1 mole of the compound has a mass of 250 g.
Solution A has 2.5 g of the compound in 1 dm
3 of solution. 
2.5 g moles  0.01 molesso its concentration is 0.01 mol
 /
 dm3.
Note the unit of concentration: mol
 /
 dm3. This is often shortened to M, 
so the concentration of solution A can be written as 0.01 M.Solution C has 250 g of the compound in 1 dm
3 of solution. 
250 g  1 mole
so its concentration is 1 mol
 /
 dm3, or 1 M for short.
A solution that contains 1 mole of solute per dm3 of solution is often 
called a 
molar solution. So C is a molar solution.
!
!Mr for copper(II) sulfate
Its formula is CuSO4.5H2O.  
This has 1 Cu, 1 S, 9 O, and 10 H.  
So the formula mass is:1 Cu 5 1 3 64
 5
 64
1 S
  
5 1 3 32
 5
 32
9 O
  
5
 9 
3 16 5
 144
10 H 
5 10 3 1
 5
   
10
  T
otal
 5
 250
Remember
 1 dm3 5 1 litre
 5
 1000 cm3
 5  1000 ml
 All these mean the same thing:
 moles per dm3
 mol  /  dm3
 mol dm23
 moles per litr eAB C
In general, to find the concentration of a solution in moles per dm3:
concentration (mol
 / dm3) 5   amount of solute (mol)    __________________________    
volume of solution (dm3)  
Use the equation above to check that the last column in this table is correct:
Amount of solute  
(mol)Volume of solution 
(dm3)Concentration of 
solution (mol  / dm3)
1.0 1.0 1.0
0.2 0.1 2.0
0.5 0.2 2.5
1.5 0.3 5.0

--- Page 84 ---
83Using moles
Q
1 How many moles of solute ar e in:
 a
 500 cm3 of solution, of concentration 2 mol  /  dm3?
 b
 2 litr
es of solution, of concentration 0.5 mol
 /
 dm3?
2 What is the concentration of a solution containing:
 a
 4 moles in 2 dm3 of solution?
 b
 0.3 moles in 200 cm3 of solution?
3 Dif ferent solutions of salt  are made up. What volume of:
 a
 a 4 mol
 /
 dm3 solution contains 2 moles of ?
 b
 a 6 mol
 /
 dm3 solution contains 0.03 moles of ?4  The Mr of sodium hydroxide is 40. How many grams  
of sodium hydroxide are there in:
 a
 500 cm3 of a molar solution?
 b
 25 cm3 of a 0.5 M solution?
5 What is the concentration in moles per litr e of:
 a
  a sodium carbonate solution containing 53 g of the 
 
salt (Na2CO3) in 1 litre?
 b
  a copper(II) sulfate solution containing 62.5 g of 
 
the salt (CuSO4.5H2O) in 1 litre?Finding the amount of solute in a solution
If you know the concentration of a solution, and its volume:
  you can work out how much solute it contains, in moles.  
Just rearrange the equation from the last page: 
amount of solute (mol) 5 concentration (mol
 / dm3) 3 volume (dm3)
  you can then convert moles to grams, by multiplying the number of  
moles by Mr.
Sample calculations
The table shows four solutions, with different volumes and concentrations. Check that you understand the calculations that give the masses of solute in the bottom row. Cover the one you want to find –  
and you will see how to calculate it.
To draw this triangle, remember that 
alligators chew visitors!Use the calculation triangle
solution sodium hydroxide  
NaOHsodium thiosulfate 
Na2S2O3lead nitrate  
Pb(NO3)2silver nitrate  
AgNO3
concentration  
(mol
 / dm3)1 2 0.1 0.05
amount of solute  
present (moles)1 3 2 5 2 2 3 
  250 _____ 1000   5 0.5 0.1 3   100 _____ 1000   5 0.01 0.05 3   25 _____ 1000   5 0.00125
Mr 40 158 331 170
mass of solute  
present (
 g)80 79 3.31 0.21252 dm3
250 cm3100 cm325 cm3amount (mol)
conc (mol/d m3) /H11003 vol (dm3)

--- Page 85 ---
6.5Using moles
84
Finding the empirical formula
Elements that combine sulfur oxygen
Masses that combine 32 g 32 g
Relative atomic masses (Ar ) 32 16
Moles of atoms that combine 32
 /
 32  1 32
 /
 16  2
Ratio in which atoms combine 1:2
Empirical formula SO2
So the empirical formula of the oxide that forms is SO2.What a formula tells you about moles and masses
The formula of carbon dioxide is CO2. Some molecules of it are shown on 
the right. You can see that:
 1 carbon atom  combines with  2 oxygen atoms  so
 1 mole of  combines with 2 moles of
 carbon atoms
  oxygen atoms
 12 g of carbon  combines with  32 g of oxygenMoles can be changed to grams, using 
Ar and Mr. So we can write:
In the same way: 
6 g of carbon combines with 16 g of oxygen 24 kg of carbon combines with 64 kg of oxygen, and so on.The masses of substances that combine are always in the same ratio.
Therefore, from the formula of a compound, you can tell:
 how many moles of the dif ferent atoms combine
 how many grams of the dif ferent elements combine. 
Finding the empirical formula
From the formula of a compound you can tell what masses of the 
elements combine. But you can also do things the other way round.  If you know what masses combine, you can work out the formula.  These are the steps:
A formula found in this way is called the empirical formula. 
The empirical formula shows the simplest ratio in which atoms combine.
Example 1
 32 grams of sulfur combine with 32 grams of oxygen to 
form
 an oxide of sulfur. What is its empirical formula?
Draw up a table like this:Ar: C/H1100512, O/H1100516COO
OOC O OC
 Sulfur combines with 
oxygen when it burns.
Find the masses that 
combine (in grams) by experiment.Change grams to moles of atoms. This tells you the ratio in which atoms combine. So you can write a formula.

--- Page 86 ---
85Using moles
Q
1 a  How many atoms of hydr ogen combine with one  
carbon atom to form methane, CH4?
 b
  How many grams of hydr
ogen combine with 12 grams of 
carbon to form methane?
2 What does the wor d empirical mean? (Check the glossary?)3  56 g of ir on combine with 32 g of sulfur to form iron sulfide. 
Find the empirical formula for iron sulfide. 
 (
Ar :  Fe 5 56, S 5 32.)
4  An oxide of sulfur is 40% sulfur and 60% oxygen.  
What is its empirical formula?Example 2  An experiment shows that compound Y is 80% carbon and 
20% hydrogen. What is its empirical formula?
Y is 80% carbon and 20% hydrogen. So 100 g of Y contains 80 g of carbon 
and 20 g of hydrogen. Draw up a table like this:
So the empirical formula of Y is 
CH3. 
But we can tell right away that the molecular formula for Y must be 
different. (A carbon atom does not bond to only 3 hydrogen atoms.) You will learn how to find the molecular formula from the empirical 
formula in the next unit.
An experiment to find the empirical formula
To work out the empirical formula, you need to know the masses of elements that combine. The only way to do this is by experiment.
For example, magnesium combines with oxygen to form magnesium 
oxide. The masses that combine can be found like this:
1
  W
eigh a crucible and lid, empty. Then add a coil of magnesium ribbon 
and weigh it again, to find the mass of the magnesium.
2
  Heat the crucible. Raise the lid carefully at intervals to let oxygen in. 
 
The magnesium burns brightly.
3
  When burning is complete, let the crucible cool (still with its lid on). 
 
Then weigh it again. The increase in mass is due to oxygen.
The results showed that 2.4 g of magnesium combined with 1.6 g of 
oxygen. Draw up a table again:Elements that combine carbon hydrogen
Masses that combine 80 g 20 g
Relative atomic masses (Ar ) 12 1
Moles of atoms that combine 80
 /
 
12  6.67 20
 /
 1  2
0
Ratio in which atoms combine 6.67 : 20 or 1:3 in its simplest form
Empirical formula CH3
Elements that combine magnesium oxygen
Masses that combine 2.4 g 1.6 g
Relative atomic masses (Ar ) 24 16
Moles of atoms that combine 2.4
 /
 24  
0.1 1.6
 /
 16  
0.1
Ratio in which atoms combine 1:1
Empirical formula MgO
So the empirical formula for the oxide is MgO.Ar /H11005 16 Ar /H11005 24OMgthe magnesium
burnstongs toraise lid
heat Empirical formulae are found by 
experiment – and that usually involves 
weighing.


--- Page 87 ---
6.6Using moles
86
From empirical to final formula
 The structure of sodium chloride.
 An ethane molecule.
 A mass spectrometer, for finding 
relative molecular mass. It compares the 
mass of a molecule with the mass of a carbon-12 atom, using an electric field.
! Molecular  Empirical  
Alkane
 
formula
 formula 
methane
 
CH4 CH4
ethane  C2H6 CH3
propane  C3H8 C3H8
butane  C4H10 C2H5
pentane  C5H12 C5H12
hexane  C6H14 C3H7The formula of an ionic compound
You saw in the last unit that the empirical formula shows the simplest 
ratio in which atoms combine.
The diagram on the right shows the structure of sodium chloride. 
The sodium and chlorine atoms are in the ratio 1:1 in this compound.  So its empirical formula is NaCl.
The formula of an ionic compound is the same as its empirical formula.In the experiment on page 85, the empirical formula for magnesium oxide 
was found to be MgO. So the formula for magnesium oxide is also MgO.
The formula of a molecular compound
The gas ethane is one of the alkane family of compounds. An ethane molecule is drawn on the right. It contains only hydrogen and carbon atoms, so ethane is a hydrocarbon.
From the drawing you can see that the ratio of carbon to hydrogen atoms  
in ethane is 2:6. The simplest ratio is therefore 1:3.  So the empirical formula of ethane is CH
3. (It is compound Y on page 85.) 
But its molecular formula is C2H6.
The molecular formula shows the actual numbers of atoms that combine to form a molecule.
The molecular formula is more useful than the empirical formula, because 
it gives you more information. 
For some molecular compounds, both formulae are the same. For others 
they are different. Compare them for the alkanes in the table on the right. What do you notice?
How to find the molecular formula
To find the molecular formula for an unknown compound, you need to know these:
  the relative molecular mass of the compound (Mr). This can be found 
using a mass spectrometer.
 its empirical formula . This is found by experiment, as on page 85.
  its empirical mass. This is the mass calculated using the empirical 
formula and Ar values.
Once you know those, you can work out the molecular formula by following these steps:
To find the molecular formula:
i
 
Calculate Mr
empirical mass for the compound. This gives a number, n .
ii
 Multiply the numbers in the empirical formula by 
n.
Let’s look at two examples.chloride ions sodium ions
shared pairs
of electrons


--- Page 88 ---
87Using moles
 Using hydrogen peroxide solution to 
clean a hospital floor. Hydrogen peroxide 
acts as a bleach, and kills germs.
 Octane is one of the main ingredients 
in gasoline (petrol). When it burns in the engine, it gives out lots of energy to move that car.
Q
1 In the ionic compound magnesium chloride, magnesium and 
chlorine atoms combine in the ratio 1:2. What is the formula of magnesium chloride? 
2 In the ionic compound aluminium fluoride, aluminium and fluorine atoms combine in the ratio 1:3. What is the formula of aluminium fluoride? 
3 What is the dif ference between an empirical formula and a 
molecular formula? Can they ever be the same?4 What is the empirical formula of benzene, C6H6? 
5  A compound has the empirical formula CH2.  
Its Mr is 28. What is its molecular formula?
6 A hydr ocarbon is 84% carbon, by mass. Its relative molecular 
mass is 100. Find:
 a
 its empirical formula
 b
 its molecular formula 
7  An oxide of phosphorus has an Mr value of 220.  
It is 56.4% phosphorus. Find its molecular formula.Calculating the molecular formula
Example 1  A molecular compound has the empirical formula HO. 
Its
 relative molecular mass is 34. What is its molecular formula? 
(Ar : H 5 1, O 5 16.)
For the empirical formula HO, the empirical mass 5 17. But Mr 5 34.
So
  Mr
empirical mass 5   34 ___ 17   5 2
So the molecular formula is 2 3 HO, or H2O2. 
So the compound is hydrogen peroxide.
Note how you write the 2 after the symbols, when you multiply.
Example 2
 Octane is a hydrocarbon
 – it contains only carbon and 
hydrogen. It is 84.2% carbon and 15.8% hydrogen by mass. Its Mr is 114. 
What is its molecular formula?
1
 First find the empirical formula for the compound.
 From the %, we can say that in 100 g of octane, 84.2 g is carbon 
 
 and 15.8 g is hydrogen.
 
 So 84.2 g of carbon combines with 15.8 g of hydrogen. 
  Changing masses to moles:
 
  84.2 ____ 12   moles of carbon atoms combine with   15.8 ____ 1   moles of hydrogen 
atoms, or 
  7.02 moles of carbon atoms combine with 15.8 moles of hydrogen 
 
atoms, so
  1 mole
 of carbon atoms combines with 
  15.8 ____ 7.02   or 2.25 moles of 
hydrogen atoms.
  So 
the atoms combine in the ratio of 1: 2.25 or 4:9.  
(Give the ratio as whole numbers, since only whole atoms combine.)
 The empirical formula of octane is therefore 
C4H9.
2
 Then use 
Mr to find the molecular formula.
 For the empirical formula (C4H9), the empirical mass 5 57.
 
But Mr 5 114.
 
So  Mr
empirical mass 5	114
57	5 2
 So the molecular formula of octane 
is 2 3 C4H9 or C8H18.


--- Page 89 ---
6.7Using moles
88
Finding % yield and % purity
 Everything is carefully controlled in  
a chemical factory, to give a high yield –  
and as quickly as possible. 
 For some products, a very high level 
of purity is essential – for example when you are creating new medical drugs.Yield and purity
The yield is the amount of product you obtain from a reaction. Suppose 
you own a factory that makes paint or fertilisers. You will want the highest yield possible, for the lowest cost! 
Now imagine your factory makes medical drugs, or flavouring for foods. 
The yield will still be important – but the purity of the product may be even more important. Impurities could harm people.
In this unit you’ll learn how to calculate the % yield from a reaction, and 
remind yourself how to calculate the % purity of the product obtained.
Finding the % yield
You can work out % yield like this:
% yield 5 
  actual mass obtained    ______________________   calculated mass   3 100%
Example
 The medical drug aspirin is made from salicyclic acid.
1 mole of salicylic acid gives 1 mole of aspirin:
 
C7H6O3 chemicals
 C9H8O4
salicylic acid   aspirin
In a trial, 100.0 grams of salicylic acid gave 121.2 grams of aspirin. 
What
 was the % yield?
1
 Ar : C 5 12, H 5 1, O 5 16.
 
So Mr : salicyclic acid 5 	 138, aspirin 5 180.
2
 138 g of salicylic acid
 5 1 mole
 so 100 g 
5 
  100 ____ 138   mole  5 0.725 moles
3
 1 mole of salicylic acid gives 1 mole of aspirin 
 so 0.725 moles give 0.725 moles of aspirin 
 
 or 0.725 
3 180 g 5 130.5 g
 So 130.5 g is the 
calculated mass for the reaction.
4
 But the 
actual mass obtained in the trial was 121.2 g.
 So % yield 
5 
  121.2 ______ 130.5   g 3 100 5 92.9%
This is a high yield – so it is worth continuing with those trials.
Finding the % purity
When you make something in a chemical reaction, and separate it from the final mixture, it will not be pure. It will have impurities mixed with it – for example small amounts of unreacted substances, or another product.You can work out the % purity of the product you obtained like this:
% purity of a product 5 
  mass of the pure product    ______________________________________     mass of the impure product obtained   3 100%

--- Page 90 ---
89Using moles
 White chalk cliffs on the Danish island 
of Mon. Chalk forms in the ocean floor, 
over many millions of years, from the hard parts of tiny marine organisms.Below are examples of how to work out the % purity. 
Example 1
 Aspirin is itself an acid. (Its full name is acetylsalicylic acid.)
It is neutralised by sodium hydroxide in this reaction:
C9H8O4 (aq) 1 NaOH (aq)  C9H7O4Na (aq) 1 H2O (l)
Some aspirin was prepared in the lab. Through titration, it was found that 
4.00 g of the aspirin were neutralised by 17.5 cm3 of 1M sodium hydroxide 
solution. How pure was the aspirin sample?
1
 Mr of C9H8O4 5 180   (Ar: C 5 12, H 5 1, O 5 16)
2
  
17.5 cm3 of 1M sodium hydroxide contain 17.5
1 000 moles or 0.0175 moles 
of NaOH
3
  1 mole of NaOH  reacts with 1 mole of C9H8O4 so 0.0175 moles react with 
0.0175 moles.
4
 0.0175 moles of C9H8O4 5 0.0175 3 180 g or 3.15 g of aspirin.
5
 But the mass of the aspirin sample was 4 g.
 
 So % purity of the aspirin 
5 3.15
4 × 100% or 78.75%. 
This is far from acceptable for medical use. The aspirin could be purified  
by crystallisation. Repeated crystallisation might be needed.
Example 2
 Chalk is almost pure calcium carbonate. 
 
10 g of chalk was reacted with an excess of dilute hydrochloric acid.  
2280 cm3 of carbon dioxide gas was collected at room temperature and 
pressure (rtp). What was the purity of the sample?
You can work out its purity from the volume of carbon dioxide given off. 
The equation for the reaction is:
CaCO3 (s) 1 2HCl (aq)  CaCl2 (aq) 1 H2O ( l )  1 CO2 ( g)
1
 
 Mr of CaCO3 5 100  ( Ar : Ca  5 40, C 5 12, O 5 16.)
2
  1 mole of CaCO3 gives 1 mole of CO2 and 
 1 mole of gas has a volume of
 24 000 cm3 at rtp.
3
  So 24
 000 cm3 of gas is produced by 100 g of calcium carbonate and 
2280 cm3 is produced by 2280
24 000 3 100 g or 9.5 g.
 So there is 9.5 g of calcium carbonate in the 10 g of chalk.
 So the % purity of the chalk
 5 9.5
10 g 3 100 5 95%.
Q
1 Define the term:  a  % yield   b  % purity
2 100 g of aspirin was obtained fr om 100 g of salicylic acid. 
What was the % yield?
3 17 kg of aluminium was pr oduced from 51 kg of  
aluminium oxide (Al2O3) by electrolysis. What was the 
percentage yield? (Ar : Al 5 27, O 5 16.)4 Some seawater is evaporated. The sea salt obtained is found 
to be 86% sodium chloride. How much sodium chloride 
could be obtained fr
om 200 g of this salt?
5 A 5.0 g sample of dry ice (solid carbon dioxide) tur ned into 
2400 cm3 of carbon dioxide gas at rtp. What was the 
percentage purity of the dry ice? (Mr of CO2 5 44.)
!Purity check!
You can check the purity of a sample by measuring its melting and boiling points, and comparing them with  the values for the pure product. 
 Impurities lower the melting  
point and raise the boiling point. 
 The mor e impurity present, the  
greater the change.

--- Page 91 ---
Checkup on Chapter 6Using moles
90
Questions
Extended curriculum
1 Iron is obtained by reducing iron(III) oxide using 
the gas carbon monoxide. The reaction is:
 
Fe2O3 (s) 1 3CO (  g )  2Fe (s) 1 3CO2 ( g)
 a
 W
rite a word equation for the reaction.
 b
 What is the formula mass of iron(III) oxide? 
  
(Ar : Fe 5  56, O 5 16.)
 c
  How many moles of Fe2O3 are there in 320 kg of 
iron(III) oxide? (1 kg 5 1000 g.)
 d
  How many moles of Fe are obtained from 
 
1 mole of Fe2O3?
 e  From c and 
d, find how many moles of iron atoms 
are obtained from 320 kg of iron(III) oxide.
 f
  How much iron (in kg) is obtained from 320 kg of iron(III) oxide?
2
 W
ith strong heating, calcium carbonate undergoes 
thermal decomposition: 
 
CaCO3 (s)  CaO (s) 1 CO2 ( g)
 a
 W
rite a word equation for the change.
 b
  How many moles of CaCO3 are in 50 g of calcium 
carbonate? (Ar : Ca 5 40, C 5 12, O 5  16.)
 c
 i
  What mass of calcium oxide is obtained from the thermal decomposition of 50 g of calcium carbonate, assuming a 40% yield ?
  
ii
  What mass of carbon dioxide will be given of
f at the same time?
  
iii
  What volume will this gas occupy at rtp?
3
  Nitroglycerine is used as an explosive. 
 
The equation for the explosion reaction is:
 
4C3H5(NO3)3 ( l ) 
   12CO2 ( g) 1 10H2O ( l ) 1 6N2 ( g) 1 O2 ( g)
 a
 How many moles does the equation show for: 
   
 i
 
nitroglycerine? 
  
ii
 gas
 molecules produced?
 b
  How many moles of gas molecules are obtained from 1 mole of nitroglycerine?
 c
  What is the total volume of gas (at rtp) obtained from 1 mole of nitroglycerine?
 d
 What is the mass of 1 mole of nitroglycerine?
  
(Ar : H 5 1, C 5 12, N 5 14, O 5 16.)
 e
  What will be the total volume of gas (at rtp) from exploding 1 kg of nitroglycerine?
 f
  Using your answers above, try to explain 
why 
nitroglycerine is used as an explosive.Revision checklist
Extended curriculum
Make sure you can …
  explain what a mole of atoms or molecules or ions 
is, and give examples
  say what the Avogadro constant is
  do these calculations, using Ar and Mr:
 –
 find the mass of 1 mole of a substance
 
–
 change moles to masses
 
–
 change masses to moles
  use the idea of the mole to:
 –
  calculate the masses of reactants or products,
 
from the equation for a reaction
 
–
  work out the equation for a reaction, given the masses of the reactants and products
 define molar volume and rtp 
   calculate the volume that a gas will occupy at rtp, from its mass, or number of moles 
  calculate the volume of gas produced in a reaction,  
given the equation and the mass of one substance 
   explain what concentration of a solution means and give examples, using grams and moles
  state the units used for concentration
  explain what a molar solution is
 work out:
 
–
  the concentration of a solution, when you know the amount of solute dissolved in it
 
–
  the amount of solute dissolved in a solution, when you know its concentration
  explain what the empirical formula of a substance is
  work out the empirical formula, from the masses that react
  work out the correct formula, using the  
empirical formula and Mr
  define % yield
  calculate the % yield for a reaction, from the  
equation and the actual mass of product obtained
  define % purity
  calculate the % purity of a product, given the  mass 
of the impure product, and the mass of pure product it contains

--- Page 92 ---
Using moles
914 Nitrogen monoxide reacts with oxygen like this: 
 2NO (
 g
) 1 O2 ( g)  2NO2 ( g)
 a
  How many moles of oxygen molecules react 
with 1 mole of nitrogen monoxide molecules?
 b
  What volume of oxygen will react with 
 
50 cm3 of nitrogen monoxide?
 c
 Using the volumes in 
b, what is:
  
i
 the total volume of the two reactants?
  
ii
 the volume of nitrogen dioxide formed?
5
 2 g (an excess) of iron is added to 50 cm3 of  
0.5 M sulfuric acid. When the reaction is over,  the reaction mixture is filtered. The mass of the unreacted iron is found to be 0.6 g. (A
r : Fe 5  56.)
 a
 What mass of iron took part in the reaction?
 b
 How many moles of iron atoms took part? 
 c
 How many moles of sulfuric acid reacted?
 d
  W
rite the equation for the reaction, and deduce 
the charge on the iron ion that formed.
 e
  What volume of hydrogen (calculated at rtp) bubbled of
f during the reaction?
6
 27 g of aluminium burns in chlorine to form 133.5 g  
of aluminium chloride. 
(Ar : Al 5  27, Cl 5 35.5.)
 a
  What mass of chlorine is present in 133.5 g of aluminium chloride?
 b
 How many moles of chlorine atoms is this?
 c
  How many moles of aluminium atoms are present in 27 g of aluminium?
 d
  Use your answers for parts 
b and c to find the 
simplest formula of aluminium chloride.
 e
  1 dm3 of an aqueous solution is made using 
13.35 g of aluminium chloride. What is its concentration in moles per dm
3?
7
 Y
ou have to prepare some 2 M solutions, with 10 g 
of solute in each. What volume of solution will you prepare, for each solute below?
 
 (Ar : H 5  1, Li 5  7, N 5  14, O 5  16, Mg 5  24, S 5  32.)
 a
 lithium sulfate, Li2SO4
 b magnesium sulfate, MgSO4
 c ammonium nitrate, NH4NO3
8 Phosphorus forms two oxides, which have the empirical formulae P
2O3 and P2O5.
 a
  Which oxide contains the higher percentage of phosphorus? 
(Ar : P 5 31, O 5 16.)
 b
  What mass of phosphorus will combine with 
 
1 mole of oxygen molecules (O2) to form P2O3?
 c
  What is the molecular formula of the oxide that has a formula mass of 284?
 d
 Suggest a 
molecular formula for the other oxide.9
 Zinc and phosphorus react to give zinc phosphide. 9.75 g of zinc combines with 3.1 g of phosphorus.
 a
 Find the empirical formula for the compound. 
  
(Ar : Zn 5 65, P 5 31.)
 b
 Calculate the percentage of phosphorus in it.
10
 110 g of manganese was extracted from 174 g of manganese oxide. 
(Ar : Mn 5 55, O 5 16.)
 a
  What mass of oxygen is there in 174 g
 of 
manganese oxide?
 b
 How many moles of oxygen atoms is this?
 c
  How many moles of manganese atoms are there in 110 g of manganese?
 d
 Give the empirical formula of manganese oxide.
 e
  What mass of manganese can obtained from 1000 g of manganese oxide?
11
 Find the molecular formulae for these compounds. (
Ar : H 5  1, C 5 12, N = 14, O = 16.)
Compound MrEmpirical  
formula   Molecular  
formula
a
 hydrazine  32   NH2
b cyanogen  52   CN
c
  nitr
ogen  
oxide
  
  92  
 NO2
d glucose 180   CH2O
12 Hydrocarbons A and B both contain 85.7% carbon. Their molar masses are 42 and 84 g respectively
.
 a
 Which elements does a hydrocarbon contain?
 b
 Calculate the empirical formulae of A and B. 
 c
 Calculate the molecular formulae of A and B.
13
 Mercury(II) oxide breaks down on heating:
 2HgO (
s)  2Hg (  l  ) 1 O2 ( g)
 a
  Calculate the mass of 1 mole of mercury(II) oxide. 
(Ar : O 5 16, Hg 5 201)
 b
  How much mercury and oxygen 
could be 
obtained from 21.7 g of mercury(II) oxide?
 c
  Only 19.0 g of mercury was collected. Calculate the % yield of mercury for this experiment.
14
 
A 5-g sample of impure magnesium carbonate is 
reacted with an excess of hydrochloric acid:
 
MgCO3 (s) 1 2HCl (aq) 
     MgCl2 (aq) 1 H2O ( l ) 1 CO2 ( g)
 1250 cm3 of carbon dioxide is collected at rtp.
 a
 How many moles of CO2 are produced? 
 b
  What mass of pure magnesium carbonate would give this volume of carbon dioxide?
  
(Ar :  C 5 12,  O 5 16, Mg 5 24.)
 c
 Calculate the % purity of 
the 5-g sample.

--- Page 93 ---
7.1
Different groups of reactions
Thousands of different reactions go on around us, in labs, and factories, 
and homes. We can divide them into different groups. For example two of the groups are neutralisation reactions and precipitation reactions.
One big group is the redox reactions, in which oxidation and reduction 
occur. We focus on those in this chapter.
Oxidation: oxygen is gained
Magnesium burns in air with a dazzling white flame. A white ash is formed. The reaction is:
 magnesium
 1 oxygen  magnesium oxide
 2Mg (
s)
 1
 O2 (g)  2MgO ( s)
The magnesium has gained oxygen. We say it has been oxidised.
A gain of oxygen is called oxidation. The substance has been oxidised.
Reduction: oxygen is lost
Now look what happens when hydrogen is passed over heated copper(II) 
oxide. The black compound turns pink:
This reaction is taking place:
 copper(II) oxide
 1 hydrogen  copper 1  water
 CuO (
s)
 1
 H2 (g)  Cu ( s)  1  H2O (l)
This time the heated substance is losing oxygen. It is being reduced.
A loss of oxygen is called reduction. The substance is reduced.
black copper(II) oxide
heathydrogen in
 Magnesium bur ning in oxygen.
 Ir on occurs naturally in the earth as iron(III) oxide, Fe2O3.  
This is reduced to iron in the blast furnace. Here, molten iron 
runs out from the bottom of the furnace. And her e, iron is being oxidised to iron(III) oxide again!  
We call this process rusting. It is ruining the bikes.  The formula for rust is Fe
2O3.2H2O.Redox Reactions
92
Oxidation and reduction

--- Page 94 ---
 A r edox reaction that cooks our food. 
The gas reacts with the oxygen in air, 
giving out heat. 
 Roaming ar ound on redox. The 
burning of petrol is a redox reaction.  So is the 'burning' of glucose in our cells. It reacts with oxygen to give us energy, in a process called respiration. Oxidation and reduction take place together
Look again at the reaction between copper(II) oxide and hydrogen. 
Copper(II) oxide loses oxygen, and hydrogen gains oxygen:
   
CuO (s) 1 H2 (g)  Cu (s) 1 H2O (l)
   
So the copper(II) oxide is reduced, and the hydrogen is oxidised.Oxidation and reduction 
always take place together.  
So the reaction is called a redox reaction.
Two more examples of redox reactions
The reaction between calcium and oxygen  Calcium burns in air with 
a red flame, to form the white compound calcium oxide. It is easy to see 
that calcium has been oxidised. But oxidation and reduction always
 take 
place together, which means oxygen has been reduced:
   
2Ca (s) 1 O2 (g)  2CaO (s)
   
The reaction between hydrogen and oxygen
 Hydrogen reacts 
explosively with oxygen, to form water
. Hydrogen is oxidised, and oxygen 
is reduced: 
   
2H2 (g) 1 O2 (g)  2H2O (l)reductionoxidation
reductionoxidation
reductionoxidation
Q
1 Copy and complete the statements:
 a
 Oxidation means …
 b
 Reduction means …
 c
 Oxidation and r
eduction always …
2 Magnesium r eacts with sulfur dioxide like this:
 2Mg (
s) 1 SO2 (g)  2MgO (s) 1 S (s)
 Copy the equation, and use labelled arr
ows to show which 
substance is oxidised, and which is reduced.
 3 Explain wher e the term redox comes from.
4 Many people cook with natural gas, which is mainly 
methane, CH4. The equation for its combustion is:
 
CH4 (g) 1 2O2 (g)  CO2 (g) 1 2H2O (l )
 Show that this is a r
edox reaction. 
5 W rite down the equation for the reaction between 
magnesium and oxygen. Use labelled arrows to show  
which element is oxidised, and which is reduced. 
 
93Redox Reactions
!Those burning reactions
 Another name for burning is combustion. 
 Combustion is a redox reaction.
 For example, when an element burns in oxygen, it is oxidised to its oxide. 

--- Page 95 ---
7.2
two electrons transfermagnesium atom oxygen atom magnesium ion, Mg2/H11545oxide ion, O2/H11546
giving
[2/H110018]2/H11001[2/H110018]2/H11002and 2/H110018/H1100122 /H110016Mg O2/H110012/H11002
Mg ORedox Reactions
94
Redox and electron transfer
Another definition for oxidation and reduction
When magnesium burns in oxygen, magnesium oxide is formed:
 2Mg (
s) 1 O2 (g)  2MgO (s)
The magnesium has clearly been oxidised. Oxidation and reduction always 
take place together, so the oxygen must have been reduced. But how?Let’s see what is happening to the electrons: 
During the reaction, each magnesium atom loses two electrons and each 
oxygen atom gains two. This leads us to a new definition:
If a substance loses electrons during a reaction, it has been oxidised. If it gains electrons, it has been reduced.The reaction is a redox reaction.
Writing half-equations to show the electron transfer
You can use half-equations to show the electron transfer in a reaction. 
One half-equation shows electron loss, and the other shows electron gain.
This is how to write the half-equations for the reaction above:1
 W
rite down each reactant, with the electrons it gains or loses.
 
magnesium:
  Mg
  Mg2 1 1 2e  2
 oxygen:   O  1 2e  2  O2 2
2  Check that each substance is in its correct form (ion, atom or 
molecule) on each side of the arrow
. If it is not, correct it.
  Oxygen is not in its correct form on the left above. It exists as molecules, so you must change O to O
2. That means you must also 
double the number of electrons and oxide ions: 
 
oxygen:
  O2 1 4e  2  2O2 2
3  The number of electrons must be the same in both equations.  
If it is not, multiply one (or both) equations by a number, to balance them.
 So we must multiply the magnesium half-equation by 2.
 
magnesium:
  2
 Mg  2 Mg2 1 1 4e  2
 oxygen:   O2 1 4e  2  2O2 2
 The equations are now balanced, each with 4 electrons.
!Remember OILRIG!
Oxidation I s Loss of electrons.
Reduction I s Gain of electrons.
!Two ways to show oxidation
You can show oxidation (the loss  
of electrons) in two ways:
Mg  Mg2 1 1 2e  2   
or
Mg 2 2e
 2  Mg2 1
Both are correct! 

--- Page 96 ---
 Br omine being displaced by chlorine, 
from a colourless solution of potassium 
bromide. The solution goes orange.the sodium atom has lost an
electron to the chlorine atomsodium ion, Na/H11545chloride, ion, Cl/H11546
Cl Na
Q
1 Give a full definition for: a  oxidation  b  r eduction
2 What does a half-equation show?
3 Potassium and chlorine r eact to form potassium chloride.
 a
 It is a r
edox reaction. Explain why.
 b
 See if you can write the balanced half-equations for it.4 Br omine displaces iodine from a solution of potassium 
iodide.
 a
 W
rite the balanced half-equations for this reaction.
 b
  Add the half-equations, to give the ionic equation for 
 
the reaction. 
95Redox Reactions
 Redox without oxygen
Our definition of redox reactions is now much broader:
Any reaction in which electron transfer takes place is a redox reaction. So the reaction does not have to include oxygen! Look at these examples:
1
 The reaction between sodium and 
chlorine 
 The equation is:
 
 2Na (
s) 1 Cl2 (g)  2NaCl (s)
  The sodium atoms give electrons to the chlorine atoms, forming ions as 
shown on the right. So sodium is oxidised, and chlorine is reduced. 
 So the reaction is a redox reaction. Look at the half-equations:
 
sodium: 2Na  2Na  1 1 2e  2  (oxidation)
 
chorine: Cl2 1 2e  2  2Cl 2   (reduction)
2
  The reaction between chlorine and potassium 
bromide 
 
 When chlorine gas is bubbled through a colourless solution of potassium bromide, the solution goes orange due to this reaction:
 
Cl2 (g) 1 2KBr (aq)  2KCl (aq) 1 Br2 (aq)
 colourless
 orange
 Bromine has been 
displaced. The half-equations for the reaction are:
 
chlorine: Cl2 1 2e  2  2Cl 2  (reduction) 
 bromide ion:
 2Br
 2  Br2 1 2e  2  (oxidation)
From half-equations to the ionic equation
Adding the balanced half-equations gives the ionic equation for the reaction. An ionic equation shows the ions that take part in the reaction.
For example, for the reaction between chlorine and potassium bromide:
 Cl2 1 2e  2  2Cl 2
 2Br  2  Br2 1 2e  2
 Cl2 1 2e  2 1 2Br 2  2Cl 2 1 Br2 1 2e  2
The electrons cancel, giving the ionic equation for the reaction:
   Cl2 1 2Br  2  2Cl 2 1 Br2
Redox: a summary 
Oxidation is gain of oxygen, or loss of electrons. 
Reduction is loss of oxygen, or gain of electrons.Oxidation and reduction always take place together, in a redox reaction.

--- Page 97 ---
7.3
 Copper in its thr ee oxidation states:
A – copper metal, 0
B – copper(I) chloride, 1
 
I
C – copper(II) chloride, 1
 
II
A B CRedox Reactions
96
Redox and changes in oxidation state
What does oxidation state mean?
Oxidation state tells you how many electrons each atom of an element 
has gained, lost, or shared, in forming a compound. 
As you will see, oxidation states can help you to identify redox reactions.
The rules for oxidation states
1 Each atom in a formula has an oxidation state.
2
 The oxidation state is usually given as a Roman numeral. 
 Note these Roman numerals:
 
number
 0
 1
 2
 3
 4
 5
 6
 7
 Roman numeral
 0
 I
 II
 III
 IV
 V
 VI
 VII
3
  Where an element is not combined with other elements, its atoms are
 
in oxidation state 0.
4
  Many elements have the same oxidation state in most or all their 
compounds. Look at these:
 Element Usual oxidation state  
in compounds
hydrogen 1
 I
sodium and the other 
Group I metals 1
 I
calcium and the other 
Group II metals 1
 II
aluminium 1
 III
chlorine and the other Gr
oup VII non-metals, in 
compounds without oxygen2
 I
oxygen
 (except in peroxides) 2
 II
5  But atoms of transition elements can have variable oxidation states in 
their compounds. Look at these:
 Element Common oxidation states in compounds
iron 1
 II and 
1
 III
copper 1
 I and 
1
 II
manganese 1
II, 1
 IV
, and 1
 VI
I 
chromium 1
 II
I and 1
 V
I
  So for these elements, the oxidation state is included in the compound’ s 
name. For example iron(III) chloride, copper(II) oxide.
6
 Note that in any formula, the oxidation states must add up to zero. 
 Look at the formula for magnesium chloride, for example:
So you could use oxidation states to check that formulae are correct. MgCl2
1 II 2 3 2I  T otal 5 zero
 The element sodium: oxidation 
state 0 (zer
o).

--- Page 98 ---
 Sodium bur ning in chlorine, to form 
sodium chloride.
 Ir on filings reacting with sulfur.  
You need heat to start the reaction off – 
but then it gives out heat.
Q
1 a W rite a word equation for this reaction:
  
2H2 (g) 1 O2 (g)  2H2O (l)
 b
 Now copy out the chemical equation fr
om a. Below 
 
 each symbol write the oxidation state of the atoms.
 c
 Is the r
eaction a redox reaction?
 
Give evidence.
 d
 Say which substance is oxidised, and which r
educed.
2 Repeat the steps in question 1 for each of these equations:
 i
 2KBr (
s)  2K(s) 1 Br2 (l)
 ii
 2KI (
aq) 1 Cl2 (g)  2KCl (aq) 1 I2 (aq)3 a Read point 6 on page 96.
 b
  Using the idea in point 
6, work out the oxidation state of 
the carbon atoms in carbon dioxide, CO2.
 c
 Carbon bur
ns in oxygen to form carbon dioxide.
 
 W
rite a chemical equation for the reaction.
 d
 Now using oxidation states, show that this is a r
edox 
  
reaction, and say which substance is oxidised, and  
 which is r
educed.
4 Ever y reaction between two elements is a redox reaction.
 Do you agr
ee with this statement? Explain.
97Redox Reactions
Oxidation states change during redox reactions
Look at the equation for the reaction between sodium and chlorine:
 2Na (
s)
 1
 Cl2 (g)  2NaCl ( s)
 0 0 1  I  2  I
The oxidation states are also shown, using the rules on page 96.
Notice how they have changed during the reaction.
Each sodium atom loses an electron during the reaction, to form an Na
 1 
ion. So sodium is oxidised, and its oxidation state rises from 0 to 1
 I.
 
Each chlorine atom gains an electron, to form a Cl
 2 ion. So chlorine is 
reduced, and its oxidation state falls from 0 to 2
 I.
If oxidation states change during a reaction, it is a redox reaction.
A rise in oxidation number means oxidation has occurred.
2 IV  2 III  2 II  2 I  0  1 I  1 II  1 III  1 IV
A fall in oxidation number means reduction has occurred.
Using oxidation states to identify redox reactions
Example 1  Iron reacts with sulfur to form iron(II) sulfide:
 Fe (
s)
 1
 S
 (s)
  FeS  (s)
 0  0  1  I I  −  II
The oxidation states are shown, using the rules on page 96.
There has been a change in oxidation states. So this is a redox reaction.
Example 2
 When chlorine is bubbled through a solution of iron(II)
 
chloride, iron(III) choride is formed. The equation and oxidation states are:
 2FeCl2 (aq)  1  Cl2 (aq)   2FeCl3 (aq)
 1 II −  I  0  1  III  −  I
There has been a change in oxidation states. So this is a redox reaction.Example 3
 When ammonia and hydrogen chloride gases mix, 
they react 
to form ammonium chloride. The equation and oxidation states are:
 NH3 (g) 1  HCl ( g)   NH4Cl (s)
 2 III  1  I  1  I  2  I  2  III  1  I  2  I
There has been no change in oxidation states. So this is not a redox reaction.

--- Page 99 ---
7.4
 Adding potassium manganate(VII) to 
an unknown liquid. The purple colour is 
fading, so the liquid must contain a r
educing agent.Redox Reactions
98
Oxidising and reducing agents
What are oxidising and reducing agents?
black copper(II) oxide
heathydrogen in
When hydrogen reacts with heated copper(II) oxide, the reaction is: 
 copper(II) oxide
 1 hydrogen  copper 1  water
 CuO (
s)
 1
 
H2 (g)  Cu ( s)  1  H2O (l)
The copper(II) oxide is reduced to copper by reaction with hydrogen.  
So hydrogen acts as a reducing agent.
The hydrogen is itself oxidised to water, in the reaction. So copper(II) 
oxide acts as an oxidising agent.
An oxidising agent oxidises another substance – and is itself reduced. 
A reducing agent reduces another substance – and is itself oxidised.
Oxidising and reducing agents in the lab
Some substances have a strong drive to gain electrons. So they are strong oxidising agents. They readily oxidise other substances by taking electrons from them. Examples are oxygen and chlorine.
Some substances are strong reducing agents, readily giving up electrons to 
other substances. Examples are hydrogen, carbon monoxide, and reactive metals like sodium. 
Some oxidising and reducing agents show a colour change when they 
react. This makes them useful in lab tests. Look at these three examples.
1 Potassium manganate(VII): an o xidising agent
Manganese is a transition element. Like other transition elements, it can exist in different oxidation states. (Look back at point 5 on page 96.)
Potassium manganate(VII) is a purple compound. Its formula is KMnO
4.
In it, the manganese is in oxidation state 1
 VII
. But it is much more stable 
in oxidation state 1
 II
. So it is strongly driven to reduce its oxidation state 
to 1
 II
, by gaining electrons. 
That is why potassium manganate(VII) acts as a powerful oxidising agent. 
It takes electrons from other substances, in the presence of a little acid.It is itself reduced in the reaction – with a colour change:
 MnO 2
4 (aq)   Mn2 1 (aq)
manganate(VII) ion
 manganese(II)
 ion
 (purple)
 (colourless)
This colour change means that potassium manganate(VII) can be used to test for the presence of a reducing agent. If a reducing agent is present, the purple colour will fade.reduction
!Remember OILRIG!
Oxidation I s Loss of electrons.
Reduction I s Gain of electrons.
!Oxidants and reductants
 Oxidising agents are also called 
oxidants.
 Reducing agents are called reductants.

--- Page 100 ---
 A br eathalyser test. The device 
contains potassium dichromate(VI),  
which is orange. Alcohol on the breath causes a colour change to green. 
 This shows the r ed-brown colour you 
get when potassium iodide is oxidised by an oxidising agent.2 Potassium dichr omate(VI): an oxidising agent
Chromium is also a transition element, and can exist in different oxidation 
states. In potassium dichromate(VI) it is in oxidation state 1
 VI
. But 
oxidation state 1
 III
 is the most stable. 
So potassium dichromate(VI) is a strong oxidising agent, in the presence of acid. It reacts to gain electrons and reduce the oxidation state to 1
 III
. 
Once again there is a colour change on reduction:
 
Cr2O2
7 2  (aq)   2Cr3 1 (aq)
dichromate(VI) ion
 chromium(III)
 ion
 (orange)
 (green)
This colour change means that potassium dichromate(VI) can be used to test for the presence of reducing agents.
Outside the lab, it is used to test for alcohol (ethanol) on a driver’
s breath, 
in the breathalyser test. It oxidises ethanol to ethanal:
 
C2H5OH  CH3CHO
 ethanol
  ethanal
So a colour change proves that the driver had been drinking.
3 Potassium iodide: a r educing agent
When potassium iodide solution is added to hydrogen peroxide, in the 
presence of sulfuric acid, this redox reaction takes place:
 H2O2 (aq) 1 2KI ( aq) 1 H2SO4 (aq)  I2 (aq) 1 K2SO4 (aq) 1 2H2O (l)
hydrogen
 potassium
 iodine
 potassium
 peroxide
 iodide
 sulfate
Y
ou can see that the hydrogen peroxide loses oxygen: it is reduced.  
The potassium iodide acts as a reducing agent. At the same time the potassium iodide is oxidised to iodine. This causes a colour change:
 2I
 2 (aq)   I2 (aq)
 colourless
 red-brown
So potassium iodide is used to test for the presence of an oxidising agent.reduction
K2Cr2O7
oxidation
Q
1 What is:
 a
 an oxidising agent?
 b
 a r
educing agent?
2 Identify the oxidising and r educing agents in these   
r
eactions, by looking at the gain and loss of oxygen:
 a
 2Mg (
s)
 1
 O2 (g)  2MgO ( s)
 b
 Fe2O3 (s) 1  3CO ( g)   2Fe ( l)  1  3CO2 (g)3 Now identify the oxidising and r educing agents in these: 
 a
 
2Fe
 1
 3Cl2  2FeCl3
 b Fe  1  CuSO4  FeSO4 1 Cu
4 Explain why:
 a
 potassium manganate(VII) is a powerful oxidising agent
 b
 potassium iodide is used to test for oxidising agents A and B show the colour change 
fr
om orange to green when potassium 
dichromate(VI) is reduced.
A B
99Redox Reactions

--- Page 101 ---
Questions
Core curriculum
 1  If a substance gains oxygen in a reaction, it has been  
oxidised. If it loses oxygen, it has been reduced.  
Oxidation and reduction always take place together,  
so if one substance is oxidised, another is reduced.
  a
  First, see if you can write a word equation for 
each redox reaction 
A to F below.
  b
  Then, using the ideas above, say which 
substance is being oxidised, and which is being
 
reduced, in each reaction.
  A
 Ca (
s) 1 O2 (g)  2 CaO (s)
  B
 2CO (
g) 1 O2 (g)  2CO2 (g) 
  C
 
CH4 (g) 1 2O2 (g)  CO2 (g) 1 2H2O (l)
  D
 2CuO (
s) 1 C (s)  2Cu (s) 1 CO2 (g)
  E
 2Fe (
s) 1 3O2 (g)  2Fe2O3 (s)
  F
 
Fe2O3 (s) 1 3CO (g)  2Fe (s) 1 3CO2 (g)
 2
 
a
 Is this a redox reaction?
 
Give your evidence.
   A
 2
Mg (s) 1 CO2 (g)  2MgO (s) 1 C (s)
   B
 
SiO2 (s) 1 C (s)  Si (s) 1 CO2 (g)
   C NaOH (
aq) 1 HCl (aq)   NaCl (aq) 1 H2O (l)
   D
 Fe (
s) 1 CuO (s)  FeO (s) 1 Cu (s)
   E
 C (
s) 1 PbO (s)  CO (g) 1 Pb (s)
  b
 For each redox reaction you identify
, name:
   i
 the oxidising agent
   ii
 the reducing agent.
Extended curriculum
 3  All reactions in which electron transfer take place 
are redox reactions. This diagram shows the 
electron transfer during one redox reaction.
magnesium atomtwo chlorine atoms
each 2/H110018/H1100172 electrons
transferCl
Cl
2/H110018/H110012Mg
  a  What is the product of this reaction?
  b
 W
rite a balanced equation for the full reaction.
  c
 i
 Which element is being oxidised?
   ii
 W
rite a half-equation for the oxidation.
  d
 i
 Which element is being reduced?
   ii
  W
rite a half-equation for the reduction of 
this element.Revision checklist
Core curriculum
Make sure you can …
 define oxidation as a gain of oxygen
 define reduction  as a loss of oxygen
 explain that oxidation and reduction always occur together
, and give an example
 explain what a redox reaction is
 define these terms:
 oxidising agent
   
reducing agent 
 identify the oxidising and reducing agents,  in 
reactions involving oxygen
Extended curriculum
Make sure you can also …
 define oxidation and reduction in terms of electron transfer
 explain these terms:
 half-equation
   
ionic equation
 write balanced half-equations for a redox reaction, to show the electron transfer
 give the ionic equation for a reaction, by adding  the 
balanced half-equations 
 explain the term oxidation state
 give the usual oxidation state for these elements, in their compounds:
  hydrogen
   
oxygen
   
aluminium
  sodium and other Group I metals
  calcium and other Group II metals
  chlorine and other Group VII non-metals
 tell the oxidation state from a compound’ s name, 
for elements with variable oxidation states
 work out the oxidation state for each element in a compound (they must add up to zero)
 give the oxidation state for each element present, in the equation for a reaction
 identify a redox reaction from changes in oxidation states, in the equation
 explain why some substances are:
 strong oxidising agents
   
strong reducing agents
 and give examples
 explain why potassium manganate(VII) and potassium dichromate(VI) are used in the lab to test for 
the presence of reducing agents
 explain why potassium iodide is used in the lab to   
test for the presence of oxidising agents
Checkup on Chapter 7Redox Reactions
100


--- Page 102 ---
 4 Redox reactions involve electron transfer .
  a
  Fluorine, from Group VII, reacts with lithium, 
from Group I, to form a poisonous white 
compound. What is its name?
  b
 W
rite a balanced equation for the reaction.
  c
  Draw a diagram to show the electron transfer 
that takes place during the reaction.
  d
 i
 Which element is oxidised in the reaction? 
   ii
 W
rite a half-equation for this oxidation.
  e
  W
rite a half-equation for the reduction of the 
other element.
 5  Ch lorine gas is bubbled into a solution containing  
 sodium bromide. The equation for the reaction is:  
  
Cl2 (g) 1 2NaBr (aq)  Br2 (aq) 1 2NaCl (aq)
  a
  Chlorine takes the place of bromine, in the metal
 
compound. What is this type of reaction called?
  b
  The compounds of Group I metals are white, 
and give colourless solutions. What would you see as the above reaction proceeds?
  c
 i
  W
rite a half-equation for the reaction of the 
chlorine. 
   ii
  Is the chlorine oxidised, or reduced
, in this  
reaction? Explain. 
  d
  W
rite a half-equation for the reaction of the 
bromide ion. 
  e
  Reactive elements have a strong tendency to 
exist as ions. Which is more reactive, chlorine or bromine? Explain why you think so.
  f
 i
  Which halide ion could be used to convert 
bromine back to the bromide ion?
   ii
 W
rite the ionic equation for this reaction.
 6
  Iodine is extracted from seaweed using acidified 
  
hydrogen peroxide, in a redox reaction. The ionic 
  
equation for the reaction is:
  2I
 2 (aq) 1 H2O2 (aq) 1 2H  1 (aq)  
 I2 (aq) 1 2H2O (l)
  a
  In which oxidation state is the iodine in seaweed?
  b
 There is a colour change in this reaction. Why?
  c
 
i
  Is the iodide ion oxidised, or reduced
? 
   ii
 W
rite the half-equation for this change.
  d
   
In hydrogen peroxide, the oxidation state of the 
hydrogen is 1I.
   i
  What is the oxidation state of the oxygen in
 
hydrogen peroxide? 
   ii
  How does the oxidation state of oxygen 
change during the reaction?
   iii
  Co
py and complete this half-equation for 
hydrogen peroxide:
   
 H2O2 (aq) 1 2H  1 (aq) 1 ..............   2H2O (l) 7  The oxidation states in a formula add up to zero.
  a
  Give the oxidation state of the underlined atom
 
in each formula below: 
   i
 aluminium oxide, 
Al2O3
   ii  ammonia, NH3
   i ii  H2CO3 (aq), carbonic acid
   i
v
 phosphorus trichloride, 
PCl3
   v  copper(I) chloride, CuCl
   vi
 copper(II) chloride, 
CuCl2
  b  Now comment on the compounds in v and vi.
 8
  The oxidising agent potassium manganate(VII) 
can be used to analyse the % of iron(II) present in iron tablets. Below is an 
ionic equation, showing 
the ions that take part in the reaction: 
  MnO4 2 (aq) 1 8H  1 (aq) 1 5Fe2 1 (aq) 
    Mn2 1 (aq) 1 5Fe3 1 (aq) 1 4H2O (l)
  a
  What does the 
H1 in the equation tell you 
about this reaction? (Hint: check page 150.)
  b
 Describe the colour change. 
  c
 Which is the reducing reagent in this reaction?
  d
  How could you tell when all the iron(II) had 
reacted?
  e
 W
rite the half-equation for the iron(II) ions.
 9
  Potassium chromate(VI) is yellow
. In acid it forms 
orange potassium dichromate(VI). These are the ions that give those colours:
CrO42/H11002 Cr2O72/H11002add acid (H/H11001)
  a   What is the oxidation state of chromium in:
 
  i
 the yellow compound?
   ii
 the orange compound?
  b
  This reaction of chromium ions is not a redox 
reaction. Explain why
.
10
  When solutions of silver nitrate and potassium 
chloride are mixed, a white precipitate forms. 
  The ionic equation for the reaction is:
  
Ag
 1 (aq) 1 Cl  2 (aq)  AgCl (s)
  a
 
i
  What is the name of the white precipitate?
   ii
  Is it a soluble or insoluble compound?
  b
  Is the precipitation of silver chloride a redox 
reaction or not? Explain your answer
.
  c
  When left in light, silver chloride decomposes
 
to form silver and chlorine gas.
    W
rite an equation for the reaction and show 
clearly that this is a redox reaction.Redox Reactions
101

--- Page 103 ---
8.1
Batteries and electric current
overhead
cablealuminium –
light, a goodconductor
steel core
for strength
The cables that carry electricity 
around the country are made of aluminium and steel. Both are conductors. (Aluminium is a better conductor than steel.) At pylons, ceramic discs support the bare cables. Since it is an insulator, the ceramic prevents  the current from running down the pylon. (Dangerous!)
steel base conducts heatplastic sheath
copper wire s
covered in plastic
Copper is used for wiring, at home. It is a very good conductor. But the wires are sheathed in plastic, and plug cases are made  of plastic (an insulator), for safety. 
 Copper carries the curr ent into the 
styling iron. Then it flows through wire 
made of nichrome (a nickel-chromium alloy) which heats up. Meanwhile, the plastic protects you.
batterypositive
terminal
carbon ro delectron
ﬂow
bulbnegative
terminal + +
The photograph above shows a battery, a bulb and a rod of graphite joined 
or connected to each other by copper wires. (Graphite is a form of carbon.) This arrangement is called an electric circuit.
The bulb is lit: this shows that electricity must be flowing in the circuit. 
Electricity is a stream of electrons.
The diagram shows how the electrons move through the circuit. 
The battery acts like an electron pump. Electrons leave it through the negative terminal. They travel through the wire, bulb, and rod, and enter the battery again through the positive terminal.
When the electrons stream through the fine wire in the bulb, they cause it 
to heat up. It gets white-hot and gives out light.
Conductors and insulators
In the circuit above, the graphite and copper wire allow electricity to pass through. So they are called conductors.
But if you connect a piece of plastic or ceramic into the circuit, the bulb 
will not light. Plastic and ceramic do not let electricity pass through them. They are non-conductors or insulators.
Some uses for conductors and insulators
ceramic discs
cable
pylonElEctricity and ch Emical chang E
102
Conductors and insulators

--- Page 104 ---
Testing substances to see if they conduct
You can test any substance to see if it conducts, by connecting it into a 
circuit like the one on page 102. For example:
Tin. A strip of tin is connected into the circuit, in place of the graphite rod. The bulb lights, so tin must be a conductor. Ethanol. The liquid is connected into the circuit by placing graphite rods in it. The bulb does not light, so ethanol is a non-conductor. Lead bromide. It does not conduct when solid. But if you melt it, it conducts, and gives off  a choking brown vapour. 
 Metals conduct, thanks to their fr ee 
electrons, which form a current.
solid heat liquid
 An ionic solid conducts when it 
melts, because the ions become fr
ee  
to move.The results  These are the results from a range of tests:
1
 The only solids that conduct are the metals and graphite.
  These conduct because of their free electrons (pages 
61 and 62). 
  The electrons get pumped out of one end of the solid by the battery
, 
while more electrons flow in the other end.
  For the same reason, 
molten metals conduct. (It is hard to test molten 
graphite, because at room pressure graphite goes from solid to gas.)
2
 Molecular substances are non-conductors.
  This is because they contain no free electrons, or other charged particles, that can flow through them.
  Ethanol (above) is made of molecules. So is petrol, paraf
fin, sulfur, 
sugar, and plastic. These never conduct, whether solid or molten.
3
  Ionic substances do not conduct when solid. But they do conduct when melted or dissolved in water – and 
they decompose at the 
same time.
  An ionic substance contains no free electrons. But it does contain 
ions, 
which have a charge. The ions become free to move when the substance is melted or dissolved, and it is they that conduct the electricity.
  Lead bromide is ionic.
 It does not conduct when solid, but conducts 
when it melts. The brown vapour that forms is bromine. Electricity has caused the lead bromide to decompose.
  Decomposition brought about by electricity is called electrolysis. 
  A liquid 
that contains ions, and therefore conducts electricity,  
is called an electrolyte.
 So molten lead bromide is an electrolyte. Ethanol is a non-electrolyte.
Q
1 What is a conductor of electricity?
2 Draw a cir cuit to show how you would test whether mercury 
conducts.
3 Explain why metals ar e able to conduct electricity.4  Naphthalene is a molecular substance. Do you think it will 
conduct electricity when molten? Explain.
5 What is:  a  an electr olyte?  b  a non-electr olyte? 
 Give 
three examples of each.Bunsen 
burner
103ElEctricity and ch Emical chang E

--- Page 105 ---
8.2
Electrolysis: breaking down by electricity
Any liquid that contains ions will conduct electricity.
This is because the ions are free to move. But at the same time, decomposition takes place.
So you can use electricity to break down a substance. 
The process is called electrolysis.
The electrolysis of molten lead bromide
The diagram on the right shows the apparatus. 
 The graphite rods are called electrodes. 
  The electrode attached to the positive terminal of the battery is also positive. It is called the 
anode.
 The negative electrode is called the cathode.
The molten lead bromide contains lead ions (Pb2 1) and bromide ions 
(Br
 2). This shows what happens when the switch is closed:switch
graphite ro d
(negative electrode
or cathode)graphite ro d
(positive electrodeor anode)
molten lead bromide+ ++ +
battery
heat
The result is that the lead bromide has decomposed:
lead bromide  lead  1 bromine
 PbBr2 (l)  Pb ( l) 1 Br2 ( g)
Note that:
  Electrons carry the current through the wires and electrodes. But the 
ions carry it through the liquid. 
  The graphite electrodes are inert. They carry the current into the liquid,  
but remain unchanged. (Electrodes made of platinum are also inert.)
The electrolysis of other molten compounds
The pattern is the same for all molten ionic compounds of two elements: Electrolysis breaks the molten ionic compound down to its elements, giving the metal at the cathode, and the non-metal at the anode.
So it is a very important process. We depend on it to obtain reactive 
metals such as lithium, sodium, potassium, magnesium, and aluminium, from compounds dug from the Earth. 
!Which electrode is positive?
Remember PA !
Positive Anode.switch
closed
+ ++ +
battery
heatanode cathode5  Electrons flow from the 
anode to the positive terminal of the battery
.
4
  At the anode (
1), the Br
 2 ions 
give up electrons. Red-brown bromine vapour bubbles off.1
  Electrons flow from the negative terminal of the battery to the cathode.
2
  In the liquid, the ions move to the electrode of opposite charge.
3
  At the cathode (
2), the Pb
 2 1 ions 
accept electrons. Lead begins to appear below the cathode.
!Obtaining aluminium
Find out how electrolysis is used to 
extract aluminium, on page 201.El
E
ctricity and ch
E
mical chang
E
104
The principles of electrolysis

--- Page 106 ---
The electrolysis of aqueous solutions
Electrolysis can also be carried out on solutions of ionic compounds in 
water, because the ions in solutions are free to move. But the result may be different than for the molten compound. Compare these:
Electrolyte At the cathode (2 ) you get … At the anode (1 ) you get …
molten sodium chloride sodium chlorine
a concentrated solution of sodium chloride hydrogen chlorine
Why the difference? Because the water itself produces ions. Although water is molecular, a tiny % of its molecules is split up into ions:
some water molecules 
 hydrogen ions 1 hydroxide ions
 H2O (l)  H  1 (aq)  1  OH  2 (aq)
These ions also take part in the electrolysis, so the products may change.
The rules for the electrolysis of a solution
At the cathode (2), either a metal or hydrogen forms.1
 The more reactive an element, the more it ‘likes’ to exist as ions. 
  So if a metal is more reactive than hydrogen, its ions stay in solution 
and hydrogen bubbles of
f. (Look at the list on the right.) 
2
 But if the metal is less reactive than hydrogen, the metal forms.
At the anode (
1), a non-metal other than hydrogen forms.
1
 If it is a concentrated solution of a 
halide (a compound containing
 Cl
 2, Br 2 or I 2 ions), then chlorine, bromine, or iodine form.
2
  But if the halide solution is dilute, or there is no 
halide, oxygen forms.
Look at these examples. Do they follow the rules?
Electrolyte At the cathode (2 ) you get… At the anode (1 ) you get …
a concentrated solution of potassium bromide, 
KBrhydrogen bromine
a concentrated solution of silver nitrate,  AgNO
3silver oxygen
concentrated hydrochloric acid,  HClhydrogen  (H
 1 is the only positive ion present)chlorine
a dilute solution of sodium chloride,  NaClhydrogen oxygen
Notice that, in the last example, the water has been decomposed!
Q
1 a Which type of compounds can be electr olysed? Why?
 b
 What form must they be in?
2 What does electr olysis of these molten compounds give?
 a
 sodium chloride, NaCl
 b
 aluminium oxide, Al2O3
 c ca lcium fluoride, CaF2 d  lead sulfide, PbS3 Name the pr oducts at each electrode, when these aqueous 
solutions are electrolysed using inert electrodes:
 a
 a concentrated solution of magnesium chloride, MgCl2
 b concentrated hydr ochloric acid, HCl
 c
 a dilute solution of copper(II) sulfate, CuSO4!Order of reactivity
potassium
sodiumcalciummagnesiumaluminiumzinciron leadhydrogencoppersilver
increasing 
reactivity
105ElEctricity and ch Emical chang E

--- Page 107 ---
!
8.3
Br–+ –
Pb2+
Br–Br–
Br–Pb2+e–
e–
e–e–
Br–
Br–
Br–
Br–Br–
Br–
Br–
Br–+ – + –
Pb2+Pb2+ Pb
Pb2+Br–+ –
Pb2+
Br–Br–
Br–Pb2+e–
e–
e–e–
Br–
Br–
Br–
Br–Br–
Br–
Br–
Br–+ – + –
Pb2+Pb2+ Pb
Pb2+Br–+ –
Pb2+
Br–Br–
Br–Pb2+e–
e–
e–e–
Br–
Br–
Br–
Br–Br–
Br–
Br–
Br–+ – + –
Pb2+Pb2+ Pb
Pb2+
Remember RAC!
Reduction At Cathode.
The solution contains Na  1 ions 
and Cl
 2 ions from the salt, and H  1 
and OH
 2 ions from water.  
The positive ions go to the cathode 
and the negative ions to the anode.At the cathode, the H
 1 ions accept 
electrons, since hydrogen is less reactive than sodium:
2H
 1 (aq) 1 2e  2  H2 ( g)
The hydrogen gas bubbles off. At the anode, the Cl
 2 ions give up 
electrons more readily than the 
OH
 2 ions do. 
2Cl
 2 (aq)  Cl2 (aq) 1 2e  2
The chlorine gas bubbles off.
When the hydrogen and chlorine bubble off, Na
 1 and OH2 ions are left 
behind – so a solution of sodium hydroxide is formed.ElEctricity and ch Emical chang E
106
The reactions at the electrodes
What happens to ions in the molten lead bromide?
In molten lead bromide, the ions are free to move. This shows what happens to them, when the switch in the circuit is closed:
First, the ions move.Opposite charges attract.So the positive lead ions (Pb
2 1) 
move to the cathode (2). The negative bromide ions (Br
 2) 
move to the anode (1).The moving ions carry the current.At the cathode (2):the lead ions each receive two electrons and become lead atoms.
The half-equation is:
Pb
2 1 (l) 1 2e  2  Pb ( l)
Lead collects on the electrode and eventually drops off it. At the anode (1):the bromide ions each give up an electron, and become atoms. These then pair up to form molecules. 
The half-equation is:
2Br
 2 (l)  Br2 (g) 1 2e  2 
The bromine gas bubbles off.
The free ions move. Ions gain electrons: reduction. Ions lose electrons: oxidation.
Remember OILRIG:
Oxidation Is Loss of electrons, 
Reduction Is Gain of electrons.Overall, electrolysis is a redox reaction.
Reduction takes place at the cathode
and oxidation at the anode.
The reactions for other molten compounds follow the same pattern.
For a concentrated solution of sodium chloride
This time, ions from water are also present:

--- Page 108 ---
Cl–OH–
Cl–OH–
OH–
OH–
OH–H+H+H+H+H
H
H
H
Na+H+H+
Na+Na+e–e–e–e–
e–e–e–e–
OH–OH–OH–OH–
Cl–OH–
OH–
OH–H+
H++ + +
e–
Cl–OH–
Cl–OH–
OH–
OH–
OH–H+H+H+H+H
H
H
H
Na+H+H+
Na+Na+e–e–e–e–
e–e–e–e–
OH–OH–OH–OH–
Cl–OH–
OH–
OH–H+
H++ + +
e–
Cl–OH–
Cl–OH–
OH–
OH–
OH–H+H+H+H+H
H
H
H
Na+H+H+
Na+Na+e–e–e–e–
e–e–e–e–
OH–OH–OH–OH–
Cl–OH–
OH–
OH–H+
H++ + +
e–
The same ions are present as 
before. But now the proportion of Na
 1 and Cl  2 ions is lower, since 
this is a dilute solution.  So the result will be different.At the cathode, hydrogen ‘wins’ as before, and bubbles off:
4H
 1 (aq) 1 4e  2  2H2 ( g)
(4 electrons are shown, to balance 
the half-equation at the anode.) At the anode, OH
 2 ions give up 
electrons, since not many Cl
 2 ions 
are present. Oxygen bubbles off:
4OH
 2 (aq) 
 O2 ( g) 1 2H2O (l) 1 4e  2For a dilute solution of sodium chloride
When the hydrogen and oxygen bubble off, the Na  1 and Cl  2 ions are left 
behind. So we still have a solution of sodium chloride! 
The overall result is that water has been decomposed.
Writing the half-equations for electrode reactions
You may be asked to write half-equations for the reactions at electrodes. This table shows the steps.
The steps Example: the electrolysis of molten magnesium chloride
1 First, name the ions present, and the products. Magnesium ions and chloride ions are present.
Magnesium and chlorine form.
2
 W
rite each half-equation correctly.
 Give the ion its correct charge.
	Remember, positive ions go to the cathode, and negative ions to the anode.
 Write the correct symbol for the element that forms. For example, Cl
2 for chlorine (not Cl). 
 The number of electrons in the equation should be the same as the total charge on the ion(s) in it.Ions:
 Mg2 1 and Cl  2
At the cathode:Mg
2 1 1 2e  2  Mg
At the anode:2Cl
 2  Cl2 1 2e  2 (two Cl  2 ions, so a total charge of 2 2)
Note that it is also correct to write the anode reaction as:2Cl
 2 2 2e  2  Cl2
3 Y ou could then add the state symbols. Mg  2 1 (l ) 1 2e  2  Mg (l  )
2Cl
 2 (l )  Cl2 (g) 1 2e  2
Q
1 At which electr ode does reduction always take place? 
2 Give the half-equation for the r eaction at the anode, during 
the electrolysis of these molten compounds: 
 a
 potassium chloride
 b
 calcium oxide3 Give the two half-equations for the electrolysis of:
 a
 a concentrated solution of hydr
ochloric acid, HCl  
b
 a dilute solution of sodium nitrate, NaNO3
 c a dilute solution of copper(II) chloride, CuCl2
107ElEctricity and ch Emical chang E

--- Page 109 ---
8.4
brine in
chlorine
gashydrogen gas
membranenickelcathode
sodium hydroxide
solution outtitaniumanodechlorine
outhydrogen
out
+Na+ Inside a salt mine. Many countries 
have undergr
ound salt beds. They were 
deposited millions of years ago, when 
the sea drained away from the land.
 Chlorine has many uses. One is to kill 
germs in water
. Behind the scenes at a 
swimming pool, this man makes sure there is chlorine in the water.
ElEctricity and ch Emical chang E
108
The electrolysis of brine
What is brine?
Brine is a concentrated solution of sodium chloride, or common salt. 
It can be obtained by pumping water into salt mines to dissolve the salt, or by evaporating seawater. 
Brine might not sound very exciting – but from it, we get chemicals 
needed for thousands of products we use every day. When it undergoes electrolysis, the overall reaction is:
  
2NaCl (
aq) 1 2H2O (l)    2NaOH (aq)    1  Cl2 ( g)  1  H2 ( g)  
  brine
                    
  s
odium hydroxide    chlorine    hydrogen
The electrolysis  
The diagram below shows one type of cell used for this electrolysis. The anode is made of titanium, and the cathode of steel. Now look at the diaphragm down the middle of the cell. Its function is to let ions through, but keep the gases apart. (So the cell is called a diaphragm cell.)electrolysis
The ions present are Na  1 and Cl  2 from the salt, and H  1 and OH  2 from the 
water. The reactions at the electrodes are exactly as shown at the bottom of page 106. (Look back at them.)
At the cathode
 Hydrogen is discharged in preference to sodium: 
 
2H
 1 (aq) 1 2e  2  H2 ( g)
As usual at the cathode, this is a reduction. At the anode
 Chlorine is discharged in preference to oxygen:
 
2Cl
 2 (aq)  Cl2 ( g) 1 2e  2
As usual at the anode, this is an oxidation. The two gases bubble off. Na
 1 and OH  2 ions are left behind, giving a 
solution of sodium hydroxide. Some of the solution is evaporated to a give 
a more concentrated solution, and some is evaporated to dryness, giving solid sodium hydroxide.

--- Page 110 ---
Chlorine, a poisonous yellow-green gas
Used for making ...
 the plastic PVC (nearly 1/3 of it used for this)
 solvents for degreasing and drycleaning
 medical drugs (a large % of these involve chlorine)
 weedkillers and pesticides (most of these involve chlorine)
 paints and dyestuffs
 bleaches
 hydrogen chloride and hydrochloric acid 
It is also used as a sterilising agent, to kill bacteria in water 
supplies and swimming pools.Sodium hydroxide solution, alkaline and corrosive
Used in making ...
 soaps
 detergents
 viscose (rayon) and other textiles
 paper (like the paper in this book)
 ceramics (tiles, fur nace bricks, and so on)
 dyes
 medical drugs
Hydrogen, a colourless flammable gas
Used ...
 in making nylon
 to make hydr ogen peroxide  
 to ‘har den’ vegetable oils to make margarine
 as a fuel in hydr ogen fuel cells
Of the three chemicals, chlorine is the most widely used.  
Around 50 million tonnes of it are produced each year, around the world.
 T anks of chlorine at a waterworks. What’s it doing here? All thr ee products from the electrolysis of brine must be 
transported with care. Why?
Q
1 What is brine? Wher e is it obtained from?
2 W rite a word equation for the electrolysis of brine.
3 Draw a r ough sketch of the diaphragm cell. Mark in where 
the oxidation and reduction reactions take place in it, and 
write the half-equations for them.
4 What is the diaphragm for , in the diaphragm cell? 5 The electr olysis of brine is a very important process.
 a
 Explain why
.
 b
 Give thr
ee uses for each of the products.
6 Y our job is to keep a brine electrolysis plant running safely 
and smoothly. Try to think of three or four safety precautions you might need to take.
 Some hydr ogen goes to hydrogen filling stations, for cars 
with hydrogen fuel cells instead of petrol engines (page 121).What the products are used for
The electrolysis of brine is an important process, 
because the products are so useful. Look at these:
109ElEctricity and ch Emical chang E

--- Page 111 ---
8.5
+
coating of
copper
blue colour fadingelectrodes
of carbon
bubbles of
oxygen copper(II) sulfate solution
+
copper cathodegrows larger
copper(II) sulfate solution
blue colour does not fadecopper
anode
dissolves
+– +– +–cathode
(pure copper)anode
(impure copper)
sludge
containing
precious
metals+– +– +–cathode
(pure copper)anode
(impure copper)
sludge
containing
precious
metals+– +– +–cathode
(pure copper)anode
(impure copper)
sludge
containing
precious
metals
The anode is made of impure 
copper. The cathode is pure copper. The electrolyte is dilute copper(II) sulfate solution.The copper in the anode dissolves. But the impurities do not dissolve. They just drop to the floor of the cell as a sludge. A layer of pure copper builds up on the cathode. When the anode is almost gone, the anode and cathode are replaced.ElEctricity and ch Emical chang E
110
Two more uses of electrolysis
When electrodes are not inert
A solution of copper(II) sulfate contains blue Cu2 1 ions, SO42
 2 ions, and H  1 
and OH
 2 ions from water. Electrolysis of the solution will give different 
results, depending on the electrodes. Compare these:
A
 Using inert el
ectrodes (carbon or platinum)
At the cathode
 Copper ions are discharged:
2Cu2 1 (aq) 1 4e  2  2Cu (s)
The copper coats the electrode.
At the anode
 Oxygen bubbles of
f:
4OH
 2 (aq)  2H2O (l) 1 O2 ( g) 1 4e  2
So copper and oxygen are produced. This fits the rules on page 105.
The blue colour of the solution fades as the copper ions are discharged.
B
 Using c
opper electrodes
At the cathode
 Again, copper is formed, and coats the electrode:
 
Cu2 1 (aq) 1 2e  2  Cu (s)
At the anode
 The anode dissolves, giving copper ions in solution:
 
Cu (s)  Cu2 1 (aq) 1 2e 2
So this time, the electrodes are not inert. The anode dissolves, giving 
copper ions. These move to the cathode, to form copper. So copper moves from the anode to the cathode. The colour of the solution does not fade.
The idea in B leads to two important uses of electrolysis: for refining (or purifying) copper, and for electroplating.
Refining copper
The copper deposited on the cathode is over 99.9% pure.  The sludge may contain valuable metals such as platinum, gold, silver, and selenium. These are recovered and sold.

--- Page 112 ---
 The pur er it is, the better copper is at conducting electricity. 
Highly refined copper is used for the electrics in cars. 
A car like this will contain more than 1 km of copper wiring.  A steel tap plated with chr omium, to make it look bright and 
shiny. Chromium does not stick well to steel. So the steel is first electroplated with copper or nickel, and then chromium.
silver nitrate solutionsilver
anodesteel jug
as cathodesource of
electricity
+ –
 Silverplating: electr oplating with 
silver. When the electrodes are connected 
to a power source, electroplating begins.Electroplating
Electroplating means using electricity to coat one metal with another,  
to make it look better, or to prevent corrosion. For example, steel car bumpers are coated with chromium. Steel cans are coated with tin to make tins for food. And cheap metal jewellery is often coated with silver. 
The drawing on the right shows how to electroplate a steel jug with silver. 
The jug is used as the cathode. The anode is made of silver. The electrolyte is a solution of a soluble silver compound, such as silver nitrate.
At the anode
 The silver dissolves, forming silver ions in solution:
 Ag (
s)  Ag 1 (aq) 1 e  2
At the cathode  The silver ions are attracted to the cathode. 
There they receive electrons, forming a coat of silver on the jug:
 
Ag
 1 (aq) 1 e  2  Ag (s)
When the layer of silver is thick enough, the jug is removed.
!To electroplate
In general, to electroplate an object with metal X, the set-up is:
cathode
 
–
 object to be electr
oplated
anode
 
–
 metal X
electr
olyte
 
–
 a solution of a soluble compound of X.
Q
1 Copper(II) ions ar e blue. When copper(II) sulfate solution is 
electrolysed, the blue solution:
 a
 loses its colour when carbon electr
odes are used
 b
 keeps its colour when copper electr
odes are used.
 Explain each of these observations.
2 If you want to purify a metal by electr olysis, will you make it 
the anode or the cathode? Why?3 Describe the pr ocess of refining copper.
4 What does electroplating mean?
5 Steel cutlery is often electr oplated with nickel. Why?
6 Y ou plan to electroplate steel cutlery with nickel.
 a
 What will you use as the anode? 
 b
 What will you use as the cathode?
 c
 Suggest a suitable electr
olyte. 
111ElEctricity and ch Emical chang E

--- Page 113 ---
Checkup on Chapter 8
Questions
Core curriculum
1 Electrolysis of molten lead bromide is carried out:
+ –bulb
molten lead
bromide
 a  The bulb will not light until the lead bromide 
has melted. Why not?
 b
 What will be 
seen at the anode?
 c
 Name the substance in 
b.
 d
 What will be formed at the cathode?
2
 Six substances A to F were dissolved in water
, and 
connected in turn into the circuit below. 
 A
 represents an ammeter, which is used to measure 
current. The table shows the results.
 + –
solutionA
Substance Current 
(amperes)At cathode 
(2)At anode (1)
A 0.8 copper chlorine
B 1.0 hydrogen chlorine
C 0.0 —— ——
D 0.8 copper oxygen
E 1.2 hydrogen oxygen
F 0.7 silver oxygen
 a Which solution conducts best?
 b
 Which solution is a non-electrolyte?
 c
 Which solution could be:
  
i
 silver nitrate?
 ii
 copper(II) sulfate?
  
iii
 copper(II) chloride?
 iv
 sodium hydroxide?
  
v
 sugar ?
 vi
 concentrated hydrochloric acid?
 d
 Explain how the current is carried:
  
i
 within 
the electrolytes
  
ii
 in the rest of the circuitRevision checklist
Core curriculum
Make sure you can …
 define the terms conductor and insulator 
 give examples of how we make use of conductors 
and insulators
 
 explain what these terms mean:
 
electrolysis
 electrolyte
 electrode 
 inert electrode
 anode
 cathode 
 explain why an ionic compound must be melted, or dissolved in water
, for electrolysis
 predict what will be obtained at each electrode, in the electrolysis of a molten ionic compound 
 say what halides are
 say why the products of electrolysis may be dif
ferent, when a compound is dissolved in water, 
rather than melted
 give the general rules for the products at the anode and cathode, in the electrolysis of a solution 
 name the product at each electrode, for the electrolysis of:
 –
 concentrated hydrochloric acid
 –
 a concentrated solution of sodium chloride
 explain what electroplating is, and why it is used
 describe how electroplating is carried out 
Extended curriculum
Make sure you can also …
 predict the products, for the electrolysis of halides in dilute and concentrated solutions 
 describe the reactions at the electrodes, during  
the electrolysis of:
 –
 a molten halide such as lead bromide
 –
  a dilute solution of a halide such as sodium chloride 
 –
  a concentrated solution of a halide
 
 and write half-equations for them
 describe the electrolysis of brine, and name the three products, and give some uses for them
 (you 
will not be asked for a diagram of the cell)
 describe the dif ferences, when the electrolysis of 
copper(II) sulfate is carried out: 
 –
 using inert electrodes (carbon or platinum)
 –
 using copper electrodes
 describe how electrolysis is used to refine impure copper
, and say why this is importantElEctricity and ch Emical chang E
112


--- Page 114 ---
Extended curriculum
3 The electrolysis below produces gases A and B.
gas A
carbon
anodecarbon
cathodegas B
concentratedsolution ofsodium chloride
power supply+–
 a Why does the solution conduct electricity?
 b
  Identify each gas, and describe a test you could 
carry out to confirm its identity
. 
 c
 Name one product manufactured from:
  
i
 gas A
 ii
 gas B
 d
 
i
  W
rite half-equations to show how the two 
gases are produced.
  
ii
  The overall reaction is a 
redox reaction. 
Explain why.
 e
  The solution remaining after the electrolysis will turn litmus paper blue.
  
i
 What is the name of this solution?
  
ii
 State one chemical property for it.
4
 a
  List the ions that are present in concentrated solutions of:
  
i
 sodium chloride
 ii
 copper(II) chloride
 b
  Explain why and how the ions move, when each solution is electrolysed using platinum electrodes.
 c
 W
rite the half-equation for the reaction at:
  
 i
 the anode
 ii
 the cathode
 
during the electrolysis of each solution.
 d
  Explain why the anode reactions for both solutions are the same.
 e
 
i
  The anode reactions will be dif
ferent if the 
solutions are made very dilute. Explain why.
  
ii
  W
rite the half-equations for the new anode 
reactions.
 f
  Explain why copper is obtained at the cathode, but sodium is not.
 g
  Name another solution that will give the same products as the concentrated solution of sodium
 
chloride does, on electrolysis.
 h
 Which solution in 
a could be the electrolyte in 
 
 an electroplating experiment?5
 Molten lithium chloride contains lithium ions (Li
 1) 
and chloride ions (Cl
 2).
 a
  Copy the following diagram and use arrows to show which way:
  
i
 the ions move when the switch is closed
  
ii
 the electrons flow in the wires
+
–++
++ +–––chloride ion lithium ionswitch
 b i   W rite equations for the reaction at each 
electrode, and the overall reaction.
  
ii
  Describe each of the reactions using the terms 
reduction, oxidation and redox.
6
 This question is about the electrolysis of a dilute aqueous solution of lithium chloride.
 a
  Give the names and symbols of the 
ions present.
 b
  Say what will be formed, and write a half-equation for the reaction:
  
i
 at the anode
 ii
 at the cathode
 c
  Name another compound that will give the same products at the electrodes.
 d
  How will the products change, if a concentrated solution of lithium chloride is used?
7
 An experiment is needed, to see if an iron object can be electroplated with chromium.
 a
 Suggest a solution to use as the electrolyte. 
 b
 
i
  Draw a labelled diagram of the apparatus that could be used for the electroplating.
  
ii
  Show how the 
electrons will travel from one 
electrode to the other.
 c
  W
rite half-equations for the reactions at each 
electrode.
 d
 At which electrode does oxidation take place?
 e
  The concentration of the solution does not change. Why not?
8
 Nickel(II) sulfate (NiSO4) is green. A solution of 
this salt is electrolysed using nickel electrodes.
 a
 W
rite a half-equation for the reaction at
  
each electrode.
 b
 At which electrode does reduction take place?
  
Explain your answer
 c
 What happens to the size of the anode?
 d
  The colour of the solution does not change, during the electrolysis. Explain why
.
 e
 Suggest one industrial use for this electrolysis.ElEctricity and ch Emical chang E
113

--- Page 115 ---
9.1EnErgy chang Es, and r EvErsibl E rEactions
114
Energy changes in reactions
Energy changes in reactions
During a chemical reaction, there is always an energy change. 
Energy is given out or taken in. The energy is usually in the form of heat. 
(But some may be in the form of light and sound.) So reactions can be divided into two groups: exothermic and endothermic. 
Exothermic reactions
Exothermic reactions give out energy. So there is a temperature rise. Here are three examples:
These reactions can be described as:
 
 reactants  products 1 energy 
The total energy is the same on each side of the arrow, in a reaction. So in 
exothermic reactions, the products have lower energy than the reactants. This is shown on the energy level diagram on the right.
The energy change
Energy is measured in kilojoule (k  J). For reaction A above: 
 Fe (
s) 1 S (s)  FeS (s) the energy change 5 2100 kJ
So 100 k
 J of energy is given out when the amounts of reactants in the 
equation (56 g of iron and 32 g of sulfur
, or 1 mole of each) react together. 
The minus sign shows that energy is given out.
Other examples of exothermic reactions
All these are exothermic:
 the neutralisation of acids by alkalis.
 the combustion of fuels. W e burn fuels to obtain heat for cooking, 
 heating homes, and so on. The more energy they give out, the better!
 r espiration in your body cells. It provides the energy to keep your    
 heart and lungs working, and for warmth and movement.
reactantsenergy
productsenergy
given outTo start off the reaction between 
iron and sulfur, you must heat the mixture. But soon it glows red hot 2 without the Bunsen burner!Mixing silver nitrate and sodium chloride solutions gives a white precipitate of silver chloride 2 and a temperature rise.When you add water to lime (calcium oxide) heat is given out, so the temperature rises. Here the rise is being measured.
 An energy level diagram for an 
exothermic reaction. The products have 
lower energy than the reactants.A B C

--- Page 116 ---
115EnErgy chang Es, and r EvErsibl E rEactions
These reactions can be described as:
 reactants 
1 energy  products 
The energy is transferred from the surroundings: in D from the air  
and wet wood, in E from your tongue, and in F from the Bunsen burner. Since energy is taken in, the products must have higher energy than the reactants. This is shown on the energy level diagram on the right.
The energy change
For reaction F above: 
 
CaCO3 (s)  CaO (s) 1 CO2 ( g) the energy change 5 1 178 kJ
So 178 kJ of energy is needed to make 100 g (or 1 mole) of CaCO3 
decompose. The plus sign shows that energy is taken in.
Other examples of endothermic reactions
Reactions D and E above are spontaneous. They start off on their own. But many endothermic reactions are like F, where energy must be put in start the reaction and keep it going. For example:
 reactions that take place in cooking.
 photosynthesis. This is the process in which plants convert carbon  
 dioxide and water to glucose. It depends on the energy from sunlight.energy taken
in from thesurroundingsenergy
reactantsproductsWhen barium hydroxide reacts 
with ammonium chloride, the temperature falls so sharply that water under the beaker will freeze!Sherbet is citric acid plus the base sodium hydrogen carbonate. The neutralisation that occurs takes in heat – so your tongue cools.The crucible contains calcium carbonate. If you keep on heating, it will all decompose to calcium oxide and carbon dioxide.
 An energy level diagram for an 
endothermic reaction. The products have 
higher energy than the reactants.Endothermic reactions
Endothermic reactions take in energy from their surroundings. 
Here are three examples:
!Remember!
Exo means out (think of Exit)
Endo means in
E
 F
Q
1 Is it exothermic or endothermic?
 a
 the bur
ning of a candle
 b
 the r
eaction between sodium and water
 c
 the change fr
om raw egg to fried egg
 
2 Which unit is used to measur e energy changes?3 2Na ( s) 1 Cl2 (g)  2NaCl (s)
 The energy change for this r
eaction is 2 822.4 kJ. 
 What can you conclude about the r
eaction?
4 Draw an energy level diagram for:
 a
 an endothermic r
eaction
 b
 an exothermic r
eaction
D
water here
has frozento icethe reaction took placein here

--- Page 117 ---
9.2
Making and breaking bonds
In a chemical reaction, bonds must first be broken. Then new bonds form.
Breaking bonds takes in energy. Making bonds releases energy.
Example 1: an exothermic reaction 
Hydrogen reacts with chlorine in sunshine, to form hydrogen chloride:EnErgy chang Es, and r EvErsibl E rEactions
116
Explaining energy changes
!Bond energy (kJ  / mole)
H2H  436
Cl
2Cl
 242
H
2Cl
 431
C
2C
 346
C
5C
 612
C
2O
 358
C
2H 
 413
O
5O
 498
O
2H
 464
N
N
 946
N
2H
 391
 Hydrogen burning in chlorine in the 
lab. Bonds break and new bonds form, 
giving hydrogen chloride.HHCl
HClH
Cl
HClH
ClHCl
H ClHClH
HHHH
H
HHHCl
Cl
Cl ClCl
Cl
ClCl
H
HH NH
HH NHHH
H
HH
NNH
HH NH
HH NHHH
H
HH
NN1 First, the bonds in the hydrogen  
and chlorine molecules must be 
broken. Energy must be taken in, for this. (Energy from sunshine will do!)
1
 First, the bonds in ammonia must
 
be broken. Energy must be taken in, 
for this. (You supply it by heating.) 2 Now new bonds form between  
hydrogen and chlorine atoms, giving molecules of hydrogen chloride. This step releases energy. 
2
 Now the hydrogen atoms bond 
together
. So do the nitrogen atoms. 
This releases energy. But the energy taken in for step 1 is less than the energy given out in 
step 2. So this reaction gives out energy, overall. It is exothermic.
If the energy taken in to break bonds is less than the energy released 
in making bonds, the reaction is exothermic.
Example 2: an endothermic reaction
If you heat ammonia strongly, it breaks down to nitrogen and hydrogen. Here we use lines to show the bonds. (Note the triple bond in nitrogen.)
This time, the energy taken in for step 1 is greater than the energy given 
out in step 2. So the reaction takes in energy, overall. It is endothermic.
If the energy taken in to break bonds is greater than the energy 
released in making bonds, the reaction is endothermic.
Bond energies
The energy needed to make or break bonds is called the bond energy Look at the list on the right. 242 kJ must be supplied to break the bonds in a mole of chlorine molecules, to give chlorine atoms. If these atoms join again to form molecules, 242 kJ of energy are given out.
The bond energy is the energy needed to break bonds, or released 
when these bonds form. It is given in kJ
 /
 mole.

--- Page 118 ---
117EnErgy chang Es, and r EvErsibl E rEactions
Q
1 T wo steps must take place, to go from reactants to products. 
 What ar
e they?
2 Some r eactions are endothermic. Explain why, using the
 ideas of bond br
eaking and bond making.3 Hydr ogen reacts with oxygen. Draw the equation for
 the r
eaction as above, with lines to show the bonds. 
4 Now see if you can calculate the energy change for the 
r
eaction in 3, using the bond energy table on page 116.energy
outenergybonds broken
energy in
2HCl (g)H2 (g) + Cl2 (g)
overall, energy OUT
− 184 kJ
energy outenergybonds broken
energy in
2NH3 (g)+ 92 kJN2 (g) + 3H2 (g)
overall, energy INCalculating the energy changes in reactions
So let's calculate the energy change for those reactions on page 116.
1 The e
xothermic reaction between hydrogen and chlorine
 H
 —
 H
 1 Cl
 —
 Cl
  2 H  —  Cl 
 Energy in
 to break each mole of bonds: 
 
1 3 H
 —
 H
 436 kJ
 
1 3 Cl
 —
 Cl 
 242 kJ
 T
otal energy in
 678 kJ
 Energy out
 from the two moles of bonds forming:  
 
2 3 H
 —
 Cl 
 2 
3 431 5 862 kJ
 Energy in 
2 energy out 5 678 kJ 2 862 kJ 5 2184 kJ 
 So the reaction gives out 
184 kJ of energy, overall.  
 Its energy level diagram is shown on the right.
2 The endotherm
ic decomposition of ammonia  
 2
 N
 —
 HHH  N  N 1 3 H  —  H 
 Energy in
 to break the two moles of bonds:
 
6 3 N
 —
 H
 6 
3 391
 5
 2346 kJ
 Energy out
 from the four moles of bonds forming:
 
1 3 N
  N 946 kJ
 
3 3 H
 —
 H
 
3 3 436
 5
 1308 kJ
 T
otal energy out
 2254 kJ 
 Energy in 
2 energy out 5 2346 kJ 2 2254 kJ 5 192 kJ 
 So the reaction takes in 
92 kJ of energy, overall. 
 Look at its energy level diagram.
Starting a reaction off
To start a reaction, bonds must be broken. As you saw, this needs energy. 
  For some reactions, not much energy is needed. Just mix the reactants 
at room temperature. (For example, reactions B and C on page 114.) 
  Some exothermic reactions need heat from a Bunsen burner just to 
start
 bonds breaking. Then the energy given out by the reaction breaks 
further bonds. (For example, reaction A on page 114.)
  But for endothermic reactions like the decomposition of calcium carbonate (
reaction F on page 115), you must continue heating until 
the reaction is complete.
 One way to get those bonds breaking!  For the hydrogen  /  chlorine r eaction.
 For the decomposition of ammonia.
!Calculating energy changes
The calculation is always:
energy in – energy out 

--- Page 119 ---
9.3EnErgy chang Es, and r EvErsibl E rEactions
118
Energy from fuels
What is a fuel?
A fuel is any substance we use to provide energy. 
We convert the chemical energy in the fuel into another form of energy. We burn most fuels, to obtain their energy in the form of heat.
The fossil fuels
The fossil fuels 2 coal, petroleum (oil), and natural gas (methane) 2 are the main fuels used around the world. We burn them to release heat.
We burn fossil fuels in power stations, to heat water to make steam. A jet of steam drives the turbines that generate electricity. We burn them in factories to heat furnaces, and in homes for cooking and heating. (Kerosene, from petroleum, is also used in lamps.)Petrol and diesel (from petroleum) are burned in engines, to give the hot gas that moves the pistons. These then make the wheels turn.
fuel + oxygenenergyplenty of
energygiven out
oxides
 The burning of fuel is an exothermic 
reaction. The more heat given out the 
better 2 as long as the fuel is safe to use.The world uses up enormous quantities of the fossil fuels. For example,  
nearly 12 million tonnes of petroleum every day! 
So what makes a good fuel?
These are the main questions to ask about a fuel: 
  How much heat does it give out?  We want as much heat as possible, 
per tonne of fuel. 
  Does it cause pollution?  If it causes a lot of pollution, we may be 
better off without it!
 Is it easily available?  We need a steady and reliable supply.
  Is it easy and safe to store and transport?  Most fuels catch fire quite 
easily, so safety is always an issue.
 How much does it cost?  The cheaper the better.
The fossil fuels give out a lot of heat. But they cause pollution, with coal the worst culprit. The pollutants include carbon dioxide, which is linked to global warming, and other gases that cause acid rain. (See page 214.) 
What about availability? We are using up the fossil fuels fast. Some 
experts say we could run out of petroleum and gas within 50 years. But there is probably enough coal to last several hundred years.

--- Page 120 ---
119EnErgy chang Es, and r EvErsibl E rEactions
Q
1 a Sketch an energy level diagram that you think shows:
  
i
  a good fuel
    
ii
  a very poor fuel 
 b
 What else do you need to think about, to decide 
  
 whether a substance would make a good fuel? 2 Look at the table above. Fr om all the information given, 
which of the three fuels do you think is best?
 
Explain.
3 The fuel butane (C4H10) burns to give the same products as 
methane. Write a balanced equation for its combustion.n
nnnKr
U-235
Ba+     energy
 When hit by a neutron, a U-235 atom 
breaks down to other atoms, giving out 
a huge amount of energy. 
 Filling up with a mixture of 85% 
ethanol, 15% gasoline.Two fuels growing in importance
Because of fears about global warming, and dwindling supplies of 
petroleum and gas, there is a push to use new fuels. Like these two:
Ethanol
 This is an alcohol, with the formula C2H5OH. It can be made 
from any plant material. For example, it is made from sugar cane in 
Brazil, and from corn (maize) in the USA. It is used in car engines, on its own or mixed with petrol. See pages 256
 2
 257
 for more.
Hydrogen
 This gas burns explosively in oxygen, giving out a lot of
 
energy 2 so it is used to fuel space rockets. It is also used in fuel cells  
(without burning) to give energy in the form of electricity. See page 121  
for more.
Different amounts of heat
Some fuels give out a lot more heat than others. Compare these:
Fuel Equation for burning in oxygen Heat given out   per gram of fuel  /  kJ
natural gas (methane) CH4 ( g) 1 2O2 ( g)  CO2 ( g) 1 2H2O (l ) 2  55 
ethanol C2H5OH ( l  ) 1 3O2 (g)  2CO2 ( g) 1 3H2O ( l ) 2  86 
hydrogen 2H2 ( g ) 1 O2 ( g)  2H2O ( g) 2 143 
Nuclear fuels
Nuclear fuels are not burned. They contain unstable atoms called radioisotopes (page 34). Over time, these break down naturally into new atoms, giving out radiation and a lot of energy. 
But you can also force radioisotopes to break down, by shooting neutrons 
at them. That is what happens in a nuclear power station. The energy  given out is used to heat water, to make jets of steam to drives the turbines for generating electricity.
The radioisotope uranium-235 is commonly used in nuclear fuels. When it 
decays, the new atoms that form are also unstable, and break down further. 
Nuclear fuel has two big advantages:
  It gives out huge amounts of energy . A pellet of nuclear fuel the size of 
a pea can give as much energy as a tonne of coal.
 No carbon dioxide or other polluting gases are formed.
But it is not all good news. An explosion in a nuclear power station could 
spread radioactive material over a huge area, carried in the wind. 
 
The waste material produced in a nuclear power station is also radioactive, and may remain very dangerous for hundreds of years. Finding a place to store it safely is a major problem.
 The radiation hazard warning sign. 

--- Page 121 ---
9.4EnErgy chang Es, and r EvErsibl E rEactions
120
Giving out energy as electricity
Electricity: a form of energy
Electricity is a current of electrons. Like heat, it is a form of energy. 
When you burn a fuel, chemical energy is converted to heat.  But a reaction can also give out energy as electricity. 
Electricity from a redox reaction
So what is going on? 
1
  Magnesium is more reactive than copper
. 
 (See the list on the right.) 
That means it has a stronger drive to form ions. So the magnesium 
atoms give up electrons, and go into solution as ions:
 Mg (
s)  Mg2 1 (aq) 1 2e  2 (magnesium is oxidised)
2
 The electrons flow along the wire to the copper strip, as a current.
3
 The solution contains Na
 1 and Cl2 ions from sodium chloride, and
 
some H
 1 and OH  2 ions from water. Hydrogen is less reactive
 than sodium, so the H1 ions accept electrons from the copper strip:
 
2H
 1 (aq) 1 2e  2  H2 ( g) (hydrogen ions are reduced) 
So a redox reaction is giving out energy in the form 
of a current.
A simple cell
The metal strips, wire, and beaker of solution above form a simple cell. Electrons flow from the magnesium strip, so it is called the negative pole. The copper strip is the positive pole. The solution is the electrolyte. 
A simple cell consists of two metals and an electrolyte. The more 
reactive metal is the negative pole of the cell. Electrons flow from it.
Other metals can also be used, as long as they differ in reactivity.  
And any solution can be used, as long as it contains ions.
You could connect a voltmeter into the circuit, to measure the voltage. 
The bigger the difference in reactivity of the metals, the larger the voltage, and the more brightly the bulb will light. Find out more on page 190.bulb
dilute
solution ofsodium chloridebulb
strip ofcopper strip of
magnesium magnesium
dissolvingbulb
bubbles of
hydrogen
Connect a strip of magnesium,   
a strip of copper, and a light bulb,  like this. (Note: no battery!) Nothing happens.Now stand the strips in a dilute solution of sodium chloride. Something amazing happens: the bulb lights! A current is flowing.At the same time bubbles of hydrogen start to form on the copper strip, and the magnesium strip begins dissolving. 
!Remember!
  In electr olysis, a current brings 
about a reaction. 
  In simple cells, r eactions produce  
a current.
!Order of reactivity
This shows the order of reactivity of 
some metals compared to hydrogen:
potassiumsodiumcalciummagnesiumaluminiumzinciron hydrogencoppersilver
increasing 
reactivity

--- Page 122 ---
EnErgy chang Es, and r EvErsibl E rEactions
121+ –
O2 (g) from air H2 (g) from tank
the carbon electrodes
contain a catalystthe electrolyte is hot
potassium hydroxide solution
H2O (g)
water vapour driven outﬂow of electronsthe current can beused to light a homeor power a car
H
2O (g)
Q
1 Can you get electricity fr om a non-redox reaction? Explain.
2 In a simple cell, which metal gives up electr ons to produce 
the current: the more reactive or less reactive one? 
3 A wir e connects strips of magnesium and copper, standing 
in an electrolyte. Bubbles appear at the copper strip. Why?4 Y ou connect two strips of iron using wire, and stand them 
in an electrolyte. Will a current flow? Explain your answer. 
5 a In the hydr ogen fuel cell, what is the fuel?
 b
 How ar
e the electrons transferred in this cell? 
 c
 What type of electr
olyte is used?The hydrogen fuel cell
In the hydrogen fuel cell, hydrogen and oxygen combine without burning. 
It is a redox reaction. The energy is given out as an electric current.
Like the simple cell, the fuel cell has 
a negative pole that gives out electrons, a positive pole that accepts them, and an electrolyte.
Both poles are made of carbon. The negative pole is surrounded by 
hydrogen, and the positive pole by oxygen (in air). The electrolyte contains OH
 2 ions.
At the negative pole At the positive pole
Hydrogen loses electrons to the OH2 ions. It is oxidised:
 
2H2 ( g) 1 4OH  2 (aq)  4H2O (l ) 1   4e  2
A current of electrons flows through the wire to the positive pole. 
You can make use of it on the way. For example, pass it through light bulbs to light your home.The electrons are accepted by oxygen molecules. Oxygen is reduced to OH
 2 ions:
 O2 ( g) 1 2H2O (l )  1 4e  2  4OH  2 (aq)
But the concentration of OH2 ions in the electrolyte does  
not increase. Why not?
Adding the two half-equations gives the full equation for the redox reaction: 
2H2 ( g) 1 O2 ( g)  2H2O (l )
So the overall r
eaction is that hydrogen and oxygen combine to form water.
Advantages of the hydrogen fuel cell  
 Only water is formed. No pollutants! 
  The reaction gives out plenty of energy . 1 kg of 
hydrogen gives about 2.5 times as much energy as  
1 kg of natural gas (methane).
  W e will not run out of hydrogen. It can be made by 
the electrolysis of water with a little acid added. 
Solar  power could provide cheap electricity for this. 
Scientists also hope to make it from waste plant material, using bacteria.
But there is a drawback. Hydrogen is very flammable.  A spark or lit match will cause a mixture of hydrogen and air to explode. So it must be stored safely.
 This car has a hydrogen fuel cell instead of a petrol engine.


--- Page 123 ---
122
EnErgy chang Es, and r EvErsibl E rEactions
The batteries in your life
Batteries and you
We depend a lot on batteries. Cars and buses will not start without them. 
Torches need them. So do mobile phones, laptops, cameras, iPods … 
The diagram on the right shows a simple model of a battery (or cell). 
All batteries contain two solid substances of different reactivity, and an electrolyte. The more reactive substance gives up electrons more readily. These flow out of the battery as an electric current. 
Since the more reactive substance provides the electrons, it is called the 
negative pole, or negative electrode, or negative terminal.
The simple cell, shown on page 120, is the simplest battery of all. But it is 
not very practical. You could not use it in a torch, for example, and it does not have enough voltage to start a car. You need other types of battery.  
A torch battery
Torch batteries are ‘dry’, and easy to carry around: 
car‘s starter motor
electron
ﬂow
lead lead(IV) oxide
sulfuric acid–+the current does some work
(for example makes a bulb light)
–+ﬂow of
electrons
(electricity)
more reactive less reactive
electrolyte
 Gotcha! T hanks to redox reactions  
in the torch battery. 
 A car battery: six sets of linked 
plates in a plastic container
.The battery ‘dies’ when the reactions stop.
A car battery
A car battery consists of plates of lead and lead(IV) 
oxide, standing in a solution of sulfuric acid, as shown on the right. This is what happens:
1
 The lead plate reacts with the sulfuric acid, 
 
 giving lead(II) sulfate: 
 Pb (
s) 1 H2SO4 (aq)  PbSO4 (s) 1 2H  1 1 2e  2
 The lead(II) sulfate coats the plate.
2
 The electrons go of
f through the wire as an electric  
 current. It gets 
the car’s starter motor working.
3
 The electrons flow back through 
the wire to the 
  
 lead(IV) oxide plate. This also reacts with the acid
 
 to form lead(II) 
sulfate, which coats the plate:
 PbO2 (s) 1 H2SO4 (aq) 1 2H  1 1 2e  2   
 PbSO4 (s) 1 2H2O (l)
In fact the car battery usually has six sets of plates 
linked together, giving a total voltage of 12 volts.
The electrolyte is often sodium or 
potassium hydroxide, made into a 
paste that will not leak. 
(So these batteries are called 
alkaline batteries.)The metal case is the negative 
pole. It is usually zinc.
The positive pole is down the 
middle.
It is often manganese(IV) oxide, 
packed around a carbon rod. The Mn
41 ions accept electrons 
to become Mn31 ions. 

--- Page 124 ---
EnErgy chang Es, and r EvErsibl E rEactions
A button battery
You probably have a button battery in your watch. Button batteries often 
use lithium as the negative terminal. Here is a cross-section through one:
 Meanwhile, the battery is r echarging.
 Lithium-ion batteries. 
 Keeping in touch, via lithium ions.  Lithium is a good choice because it is highly reactive: it gives up electrons easily. These flow out through the top of the steel case, to the connection in your watch. They flow back through the lower part of the case, and Mn
4 1 ions accept them, to become Mn3 1 ions.
A lithium-ion battery
Lithium-ion batteries are rechargeable. So they are used in laptops, mobile phones, and iPods. 
The battery consists of thin sheets of lithium cobalt oxide (LiCoO
2), and 
graphite (carbon). The electrolyte is a solution of a lithium salt in an 
organic solvent. This is how the battery works:
When it is charging When you use it
+ –ﬂow of
current
charger
Li/H11001Li/H11001Li/H11001
Li/H11001Li/H11001Li/H11001
Li/H11001
Li/H11001 Li/H11001lithium
cobalt
oxidegraphite
When your phone is charging, the 
graphite becomes negative, and attracts lithium ions from the lithium cobalt oxide.When you use it, the lithium ions flow back 
to lithium cobalt oxide, and electrons flow from the graphite to power your phone.
So your calls and texts depends on those lithium ions moving.  
Remember that, next time you use your mobile!Recharging the car battery
While the car battery is running, the plates are being coated with lead(II) sulfate, and the sulfuric acid is being used up. So if it runs for long enough, the battery will stop working, or ‘go flat’.
But it needs to run for only a short time, to start the 
car. And then something clever happens: electricity generated by the motor causes the reactions to reverse. The lead(II) sulfate on the plates is converted back to lead and lead(IV) oxide, ready for next time. 
manganese(IV) oxidelithiumsteel case in 
two parts
insulating sealelectrolyte (a lithium salt 
dissolved in an organic solvent)
 Button batteries come in dif ferent 
sizes, for different uses.
123graphitelithium
cobalt
oxide+ –ﬂow of
current
phone
Li/H11001Li/H11001Li/H11001
Li/H11001Li/H11001Li/H11001
Li/H11001
Li/H11001 Li/H11001

--- Page 125 ---
9.5EnErgy chang Es, and r EvErsibl E rEactions
124
Reversible reactions
When you heat copper(II) sulfate crystals …
The blue crystals above are hydrated  
copper(II) sulphate. On heating, 
they  turn to a white powder. This is 
anhydrous copper(II) sulfate:CuSO
4.5H2O ( s)    
CuSO4 (s) 1 5H2O (l ) The reaction is easy to reverse: add water! 
The anhydrous copper(II) 
sulfate gets hot and turns blue.  The reaction is:CuSO
4 (s) 1 5H2O ( l )   
CuSO4.5H2O (s) 1
!Water of crystallisation
  The water in blue copper(II)  
sulfate crystals is called  
water of crystallisation.
  Hydrated means it has water  molecules built into its structure.
  Anhydrous means no water is  present.
So the reaction can go in either direction: it is reversible.  
The reaction we start with (1 above) is called the forward reaction. Reaction 2 is the back reaction 
We use the symbol 
 instead of a single arrow, to show that a reaction is 
reversible. So the equation for the reaction above is:
 
CuSO4.5H2O (s)  CuSO4 (s) 1 5H2O ( l ) 
What about the energy change?
Reaction 1 above requires heat 2 it is endothermic. In 2, the white 
powder gets hot and spits when you drip water on it 2 so that reaction is exothermic. It gives out the same amount of heat as reaction 1 took in. 
A reversible reaction is endothermic in one direction, and exothermic 
in the other. The same amount of energy is transferred each time.
Some important reversible reactions
Many important reactions are reversible. Here are some examples:
Reaction Comments
 N2 ( g) 1  3H2 ( g)  2NH3 ( g)
 nitr
ogen
 hydr
ogen
 ammoniaThis is a very important r eaction, because ammonia is used to 
make nitric acid and fertilisers.
 2SO2 ( g) 1  O2 ( g)  2SO3 ( g)
 sulfur dioxide
 oxygen
 sulfur trioxide This is a key step in the manufactur e of sulfuric acid.
 CaCO3 (s)  CaO ( s)  1  CO2 ( g)
 calcium carbonate
 calcium oxide
 carbon dioxideThis is a thermal decomposition: it needs heat. Calcium oxide 
(called lime, or quicklime) has many uses (page 240).
energywhite powder
blue crystalsenergy change
 In a reversible reaction, the energy 
change is the same in both directions.2
!Two tests for water
Water will turn:
 white anhydr ous copper(II) 
sulfate blue
 blue cobalt chloride paper pink. 
Both compounds add on water of 
crystallisation, giving the colourchange. T
o reverse, just heat!

--- Page 126 ---
125EnErgy chang Es, and r EvErsibl E rEactions
Reversible reactions and equilibrium
As you saw in the last table, the reaction between nitrogen and hydrogen 
to make ammonia is reversible:
 N2 ( g) 1 3H2 ( g)  2NH3 ( g)
So let’s see what happens during the reaction:
H
HHH
N
NN
NN
N
NN
NNNN
N
N NNH
H
HHHHHHH
HHH
HH
HHH
H
H
H
HH
HHH
H
H
HHHH
HHHHHHHH
H
H
HHH
HHH
HH
HH
H H
HNN
NN
H
HNNN
NH
HHHH
HHHH
HHH
Three molecules of hydrogen react 
with one of nitrogen to form two of ammonia. So if you put the correct mixture of nitrogen and hydrogen into a closed container …... will it all turn into ammonia? No! Once a certain amount of ammonia is formed, the system reaches a state of dynamic equilibrium. From then on …… every time two ammonia molecules form, another two break down into nitrogen and hydrogen. So the level of ammonia remains unchanged.
Equilibrium
 means there is 
no overall change. The amounts of nitrogen, 
hydrogen and ammonia remain steady. But dynamic means there is continual change: ammonia molecules continually break down, while new ones form.
In a closed system, a reversible reaction reaches a state of dynamic 
equilibrium, where the forward and back reactions take place at  the same rate. So there is no overall change.
The term dynamic equilibrium is usually shortened to equilibrium.
A challenge for industry
Imagine you run a factory that makes ammonia. You want the yield of 
ammonia to be as high as possible. 
But the reaction between nitrogen and hydrogen is never complete.  
Once equilibium is reached, a molecule of ammonia breaks down every  time a new one forms. 
This is a problem. What can you do to increase the yield of ammonia? 
You will find out in the next unit.
Q
1 What is a reversible reaction?
2  W rite a word equation for the reaction between solid  
copper(II) sulfate and water. 
3 How would you tur n hydrated copper(II) sulfate into  
anhydrous copper(II) sulfate?
4 What will you observe if you place pink cobalt chloride  
paper in warm oven?5 Explain the term dynamic equilibrium.
6 Nitr ogen and hydrogen are mixed, to make ammonia. 
 a
 Soon, two r
eactions are going on in the mixture.  
 Give the equations for them.
 b
  For a time, the rate of the forwar
d reaction is greater  
than the rate of the back reaction. Has equilibrium  
been reached? Explain. 
 W orried about the yield?

--- Page 127 ---
9.6EnErgy chang Es, and r EvErsibl E rEactions
126
Shifting the equilibrium
The challenge
Reversible reactions present a challenge to industry, because they never 
complete. Let’s look at that reaction between nitrogen and hydrogen again:
 N2 ( g) 1 3H2 ( g)  2NH3 ( g)
NN
NN HHHH
HH
NHHHHHHH
HH
HHHH
NHH
HH
H
H
HNHH
H HHHH
NH
HHNH
HHN
HHH
NN
NN N
HH HNH
HH
HH
HHHHHH
NNNN
NH
H HNH
H HNH
H HN
HH
H
HHHH
100%
reactants100%
product
heat
used
upHHHHHHNNNHH
H
H
H HN100%
reactants100%
product100%
reactants100%
productThis represents the reaction mixture 
at equilibrium. The amount of ammonia in it will not increase …
The forward reaction is exothermic 2 
it gives out heat. The back reaction  
is endothermic 2  it takes it in. 
Heating speeds up both reactions …  
N2 1 3H3  heat out  2NH3
  2NH3  heat in  N2 1 3H3... because every time a new 
molecule of ammonia forms, another breaks down.
… but if you heat the equilibrium mixture, it acts to oppose the change. More ammonia breaks down in order to use up the heat you add.Here the red triangle represents  the equilibrium mixture. It is only part way along the scale. Why?
So the reaction reaches equilibrium faster 2 but the new equilibrium mixture has less ammonia. So you are worse off than before. What can be done?
You want as much ammonia as possible. So how can you increase the yield?  
This idea, called Le Chatelier’s principle, will help you:
When a reversible reaction is in equilibrium and you make a change, 
the system acts to oppose the change, and restore equilibrium.  A new equilibrium mixture forms.
A reversible reaction always reaches equilibrium, in a closed system.  
But by changing conditions, you can shift equilibrium, so that the mixture contains more product. Let’s look at four changes you could make. 
1 Change the temperatur e
Will raising the temperature help you obtain more ammonia? Let’s see.
What if you lower the temperature? The system acts to oppose the change: 
more ammonia forms, giving out heat. Great! But if the temperature is too low, the reaction takes too long to reach equilibrium. Time is money, in a factory. So it is best to choose
 
a moderate temperature. A change in r eaction conditions has 
led to a new equilibrium mixture, with 
more ammonia. Equilibrium has shifted to the right, to favour the product.

--- Page 128 ---
127EnErgy chang Es, and r EvErsibl E rEactions
Q
1 The r eaction between nitrogen and hydrogen is reversible. 
This causes a problem for the ammonia factory. Why?
2 What is Le Chatelier‘s principle? W rite it down.
3 In manufacturing ammonia, explain why:
 a
 high pr
essure is used
  
b
 ammonia is r
emoved4 Sulfur dioxide (SO2) and oxygen react exothermically to form  
sulfur trioxide (SO3). The reaction is reversible.
 a
 W
rite the symbol equation for this reaction.
 b
 What happens to the yield of sulfur trioxide if you:
  
i
 incr
ease the pressure?
 ii
 raise the temperatur
e?2 Change the pr essure
100%
reactants100%
product
4 molecules 2 moleculesHHHHH
H
NN
NN
HHH
H
HH
Pressure is caused by the gas 
molecules colliding with the walls  
of the container. The more molecules present, the higher the pressure.  When you increase the pressure, the equilibrium mixture acts to oppose this. More ammonia forms, which means fewer molecules.So the amount of ammonia in the mixture has increased. Equilibrium has shifted to the right. Well done. You are on the right track.
3 Remove the ammon ia
The equilibrium mixture is a balance between nitrogen, hydrogen, and ammonia. Suppose you cool the mixture. Ammonia condenses first, so you can run it off as a liquid. Then warm the remaining nitrogen and hydrogen again. More ammonia will form, to restore the balance.
4 Add a catal yst
Iron is a catalyst for this reaction.  A catalyst speeds up the forward and back reactions equally.  So the reaction reaches equilibrium faster, which saves you time.  But the amount of ammonia does not change.  
Choosing the optimum conditions
So to get the best yield of ammonia, it is best to:
 use high pressure, and remove ammonia, to improve the yield
  use a moderate temperature, and a catalyst, to get a decent rate.
Page 227 shows how these ideas are applied in an ammonia factory. 
A note about rate
By now, you should realize that: 
 a change in temperature always shifts equilibrium. 
 a change in pressure will shift equilibrium only if the number of  
 molecules is dif
ferent on each side of the equation.  
But how do these changes affect the rate? Raising the temperature or pressure increases the rate of both the forward and back reactions, so equilibrium is reached faster. (A temperature rise gives the molecules more energy. An increase in pressure forces them closer. So in both cases, the number of successful collisions increases.) 
!A summary, for reversible  
reactions of gases
	Forward reaction exothermic: 
temperature ↑ means yield ↓. 
	Forward reaction endothermic: temperature ↑ means yield ↑.
	Fewer molecules on the right-hand side of the equation: pressure ↑ means yield ↑.
!What about solutions?
Many reversible reactions take place in solution: reactants (aq)
  pr oducts (aq)
You can shift the equilibrium:
	by adding more of a reactant (increasing its concentration).  So more product will form to oppose this change.
	by changing the temperature.  A rise in temperature will favour the endothermic reaction. 

--- Page 129 ---
Checkup on Chapter 9
Questions
Core curriculum
1 Look at this reaction:
 NaOH (
aq) 1 HCl (aq)  NaCl (aq) 1 H2O ( l )
 a
 Which type of reaction is it?
 b
 It is 
exothermic. What does that mean?
 c
  What will happen to the temperature of the 
 
solution, as the chemicals react?
 d
 Draw an energy diagram for the reaction.
2
 W
ater at 25
 
°C was used to dissolve two 
compounds. The temperature of each solution 
was measured immediately afterwards.
Compound Temperature of solution  / °C
ammonium nitrate 21
calcium chloride 45
 a  List the apparatus needed for this experiment.
 
b
  Calculate the temperature change on 
 
dissolving each compound.
 c
 i
 
Which compound dissolved exothermically?
  
ii
  How did you decide this
?
  iii
  What can you say about the energy level of its ions in the solution, compared with in the solid compound? 
 d
  For each solution, estimate the temperature of the solution if:
  
i
  the amount of water is halved, but the same mass of compound is used
  
ii
  the mass of the compound is halved, but the volume of water is unchanged
  
iii
  both the mass of the compound, and the volume of water
, are halved.
3
 Hydrated copper(II) sulfate crystals were heated:
 icehydrated
copper(II) sulfate heat
 a What is the ice for?
 b
 What colour change 
will occur in the test-tube?
 c
  The reaction is 
reversible. What does that mean?
 d
 How would you show that it is reversible?
 
 e
 W
rite the equation for the reversible reaction.Revision checklist
Core curriculum
Make sure you can …
  exp lain what these terms mean: 
exothermic reaction
   
endothermic reaction
  give examples of exothermic and endothermic  
reactions and draw energy level diagrams for them
  state the unit used for measuring energy
  say what the  1 and 2 signs mean, in energy values
 explain what the purpose of a fuel is
   name the fossil fuels, and say how we use them
  explain what nuclear fuels are, and where we use 
them, and name one
  give advantages and disadvantages of nuclear fuels
  say how hydrogen and ethanol are used as fuels
  explain what a reversible reaction is, with examples
  write the symbol for a reversible reaction
  describe how to change hydrated copper(II) sulfate 
to the anhydrous compound, and back again
  explain why anhydrous copper(II) sulfate can be 
used to test for the presence of water
Extended curriculum
Make sure you can also …
  u se the idea of bond making and bond breaking  
to explain why a reaction is exo- or endothermic
 define bond energy
  calculate the energy change in a reaction, given  
the equation, and bond energy values
  describe a simple cell, and explain that the current 
comes from a redox reaction
  predict which metal will be the negative pole in a 
simple cell
  give half-equations for reactions that take place  
in a simple cell (like the one on page 120)
  describe the hydrogen fuel cell, and give the  
overall reaction that takes place in it
  explain that a reversible reaction never completes, 
in a closed container
 – it reaches equilibrium
  give ways to obtain more product in a gaseous  
reversible reaction
  predict the ef fect of a change in temperature and 
pressure, for a given reversible reaction
  say how a catalyst will af fect a reversible reaction
 predict the ef fect of a change in conditions for  
a reversible reaction in solutionEnErgy chang Es, and r EvErsibl E rEactions
128


--- Page 130 ---
Extended curriculum
4 The fuel natural gas is mostly methane. 
 Its combusion in oxygen is exothermic: 
 
 
CH4 ( g) 1 2O2 ( g)  CO2 ( g) 1 2H2O ( l )
 a
  Explain 
why this reaction is exothermic, in 
terms of bond breaking and bond making.
 b
 i
  Copy and complete this energy diagram for 
the reaction, indicating:
   
A
 the overall energy change
   
B
 the energy needed to break bonds
   
C
 the energy given out by new bonds forming.
   CH4 (g) + 2O2 (g)energy
  ii   Methane will not burn in air until a spark or flame is applied. Why not?
 c
 When 1 mole of methane burns in oxygen, 
 
 the energy change is 
2 890 kJ.
  i
 What does the 
2 sign tell you?
  
ii
  Which word describes a reaction with this type of energy change?
 d
 How much energy is given out when 1 gram 
 
 of methane burns?
 (
Ar :  C 5 12, H 5 1.)
5
 Strips of copper foil and magnesium ribbon were cleaned with sandpaper and then connected as shown below
. The bulb lit up.
 copper foil
sulfuric acidmagnesium ribbon 
 a Why were the metals cleaned?
 b
 Name the electrolyte used.
 c
 Explain why the bulb lit up.
 d
 
Which metal releases electrons into the circuit?
 e
  In this arrangement, energy is being changed 
from one form to another
. Explain.
 f
 What is this type of arrangement called?
 g
  Give reasons why the set-up shown above would not be used as a torch battery
.6
 The gas hydrazine, N2H4, burns in oxygen like this:
 NH
NH
H HNN (g) + O O (g) (g) + 2OH
H(g)
 a  Count and list the bonds broken in this reaction.
 b
 Count and list the new bonds formed.
 c
 Calculate the total energy:
  
i
 required to break the bonds
  
ii
 released when the new bonds form.
  
 (The bond energies in kJ
 /
 mole are: N
2H 391;  
N2N 158; NN 945; O2H 464; O5O 498.)
 d
 Calculate the energy change in the reaction.
 e
 Is the reaction exothermic, or endothermic?
 f
 Where is energy transferred from, and to?
 g
 Comment on the suitability of hydrazine as 
 
 a fuel.
7
 Hydrogen and bromine react reversibly:
  
H2 ( g) 1 Br2 ( g)  2HBr  (  g )
 a
  Which of these will favour the formation of more hydrogen bromide?
  
i
 add more hydrogen
 ii
  remove bromine
  
iii
 
remove the hydrogen bromide as it forms
 b
  Explain why increasing the pressure will have no ef
fect on the amount of product formed.
 c
  However
, the pressure is likely to be increased, 
when the reaction is carried out in industry.  Suggest a reason for this.
8
 Ammonia is made from nitrogen and hydrogen. 
 
The energy change in the reaction is 292 kJ
 
/
 
mole.
 The reaction is reversible, and reaches equilibrium. 
 a
 W
rite the equation for the reaction.
 b
  Is the forward reaction endothermic, or exothermic? Give your evidence.
 c
 Explain why the 
yield of ammonia:
  
i
 rises if you increase the pressure
  
ii
 falls if you increase the temperature
 d
 What ef
fect does increasing:
  i
 the pressure
 ii
 the temperature 
 
 have on the 
rate at which ammonia is made?
 e
 Why is the reaction carried out at 450
 
°C  
 rather than at a lower temperature?
9
 The dichromate
 ion Cr2 O7 22 and chromate ion 
CrO4 22 exist in equilibrium, like this:
 Cr2O7 22 (aq) 1 H2O ( l )  2CrO4 22 (aq) 1 2H1 (aq)
 orange
 yellow
 a
  What would you see if you added dilute acid to a solution containing chromate ions?
 b
 How would you reverse the change?EnErgy chang Es, and r EvErsibl E rEactions
129

--- Page 131 ---
10.1
Fast and slow
Some reactions are fast and some are slow. Look at these examples:
The precipitation of silver chloride, 
when you mix solutions of silver nitrate and sodium chloride. This is a very fast reaction.Concrete setting. This reaction is quite slow. It will take a couple of days for the concrete to fully harden.Rust forming on an old car. This is usually a very slow reaction. It will take years for the car to rust completely away.
From these examples you can see that:
Rate is a measure of the change that happens in a single unit of time.Any suitable unit of time can be used – a second, a minute, an hour, even 
a day.This plane has just flown 800 
kilometers in 1 hour. It flew at  a rate of 800 km per hour.This petrol pump can pump out petrol at a rate of 50 litres per minute.This machine can print newspapers at a rate of 10 copies per second.
But it is not always enough to know just that a reaction is fast or slow. In factories where they make products from chemicals, they need to know exactly how fast a reaction is going, and how long it will take to complete. In other words, they need to know the rate of the reaction.
What is rate?
Rate is a measure of how fast or slow something is. Here are some examples.
The speed of a reac Tion
130
Rates of reaction

--- Page 132 ---
When zinc is added to dilute 
sulfuric acid, they react together. The zinc disappears slowly, and a gas bubbles off.As time goes by, the gas bubbles off more and more slowly.  
This is a sign that the reaction is slowing down.Finally, no more bubbles appear. The reaction is over, because all the acid has been used up. Some zinc remains behind.
Rate of a chemical reaction
The gas that bubbles off is hydrogen. The equation for the reaction is:
  
zinc
 1
 sulfuric acid  zinc sulfate 1 hydrogen
 
Zn (s)
 1
 
H2SO4 (aq)   ZnSO4 (aq)  1  H2 (g)
Both zinc and sulfuric acid get used up in the reaction. At the same time, zinc sulfate and hydrogen form.
You could measure the rate of the reaction, by measuring:
 the amount of zinc used up per minute or
 the amount of sulfuric acid used up per minute or
 the amount of zinc sulfate produced per minute or
 the amount of hydrogen produced per minute.
For this reaction, it is easiest to measure the amount of hydrogen 
produced per minute, since it is the only gas that forms. It can be collected as it bubbles of
f, and its volume can be measured.
In general, to find the rate of a reaction, you should measure:
 the amount of a reactant used up per unit of time 
or
 the amount of a product produced per unit of time.
Q
1 Her e are some reactions that take place in the home. Put 
them in order of decreasing rate (the fastest one first).
 a
 raw egg changing to har
d-boiled egg
 b
 fruit going r
otten
 c
 cooking gas bur
ning
 d
 br
ead baking
 e
 a metal tin rusting
2 Which of these rates of travel is slowest?
 5 kilometr
es per second
 20 kilometr
es per minute
 60 kilometr
es per hour3 Suppose you had to measur e the rate at which zinc is used 
up in the reaction above. Which of these units would be 
suitable? Explain your choice.
 a
 litr
es per minute
 b
 grams per minute
 c
 centimetr
es per minute
4 Ir on reacts with sulfuric acid like this:
 Fe (
s) 1 H2SO4 (aq)  FeSO4 (aq) 1 H2 (g)
 a
 W
rite a word equation for this reaction.
 b
  W
rite down four different ways in which the rate of 
the reaction could be measured.
131The speed of a reac Tion

--- Page 133 ---
10.2
Clean the magnesium with sandpaper. Put dilute hydrochloric acid in the 
flask. Drop the magnesium into the flask, and insert the stopper and syringe immediately. Start the clock at the same time.
At the start, no gas has yet been 
produced or collected. So the plunger is all the way in. Now the plunger has been pushed out to the 20 cm
3 mark. 20 cm3 of 
gas have been collected.the plunger can move out
gas syringe
excess dilute
hydrochloric acidstopclock
magnesium
Hydrogen begins to bubble off. It rises up the flask and into the gas 
syringe, pushing the plunger out:
The volume of gas in the syringe is noted at intervals – for example every 
half a minute. How will you know when the reaction is complete?
Typical results
Time  /  minutes 0   1 __ 2  1 1   1 __ 2  2 2   1 __ 2  3 3   1 __ 2  4 4   1 __ 2  5 5   1 __ 2  6 6   1 __ 2  
V
olume of hydrogen
 /
 cm30 8 14 20 25 29 33 36 38 39 40 40 40 40
This table shows some typical results for the experiment.
You can tell quite a lot from this table. For example, you can see that the 
reaction lasted about five minutes. But a graph of the results is even more helpful. The graph is shown on the next page. T esting an explosive substance. The 
rate of a fast reaction like this, giving a mix of gases, is not easy to measure.The speed of a reac
T
ion
132
Measuring the rate of a reaction
A reaction that produces a gas
The rate of a reaction is found by measuring the amount of a reactant 
used up per unit of time, or the amount of a product produced per unit of time. Look at this reaction:
magnesium 1 hydrochloric acid 
 magnesium chloride 1 hydrogen
 Mg (
s)
 1
 2HCl (
aq)
  MgCl2 (aq)  1  H2 (g)
Here hydrogen is the easiest substance to measure, because it is the only 
gas in the reaction. It bubbles off and can be collected in a gas syringe, where its volume is measured.
The experiment

--- Page 134 ---
40
30
20
10
0 123456 7
Time/minutesVolume of hydrogen/c m3
The reaction between magnesium 
and dilute hydrochloric acid
curve ﬂat,reaction over
curve less steep,reaction slower
curve steepest,reaction fastestNotice these things about the results:
1
 In the first minute, 14 cm3 of hydrogen are produced.
 So the rate for the first minute is 14 cm3 of hydrogen per minute.
 In the second minute, only 11 cm3 are produced. (25 2 14 5 11)
 So the rate for the second minute is 11 cm3 of hydrogen per minute.
 The rate for the third minute is 8 cm3 of hydrogen per minute.
 So the rate decreases as time goes on.
  The rate changes all through the reaction. It is greatest at the 
start, but decreases as the reaction proceeds.
2
  The reaction is fastest in the first minute, and the curve is steepest then. 
It gets less steep as the reaction gets slower.
 The faster the reaction, the steeper the curve.
3
  After 5 minutes, no more hydrogen is produced, so the volume no longer changes. The reaction is over
, and the curve goes flat.
 When the reaction is over
, the curve goes flat.
4
 Altogether
, 40 cm3 of hydrogen are produced in 5 minutes.
 
The average rate for the reaction
 5
 
  total volume of hydrogen   _________________________    total time for the reaction  
    5
   40 cm3 __________ 5 minutes  
    5 
8 cm3 of hydrogen per minute.
Note that this method can be used for any reaction where one product is a gas.
Q
1 For the experiment in this unit, explain why:
 a
 the magnesium ribbon is cleaned first
 b
 the clock is started the moment the r
eactants are mixed
 c
 the stopper is r
eplaced immediately
2 Fr om the graph at the top of this page, how can you tell 
when the reaction is over?3 Look again at the graph at the top of the page.
 a
 How much hydr
ogen is produced in the first:
  
i
  2.5 minutes?
  ii
  4.5 minutes?
 b
 How long did it take to get 20 cm3 of hydrogen?
 c
 What is the rate of the r
eaction during:
  
i
  the fourth minute?
  ii
  the sixth minute? A graph of the results
133The speed of a reac Tion

--- Page 135 ---
10.3
AB
50 cm3 of
hydrochloric acid50 cm3 of
hydrochloric acid
(twice as concentrated)
0.05 g of magnesium 0.05 g of magnesium
60
50
40
30
20
10
01 02 03 04 05 06 07 08 09 0 100 110 120 130
Time/secondsVolume of hydrogen/c m3
The results for experiments A and BB
AThe results  Here are both sets of results, shown on the same graph.
Notice these things about the results:
1
 Curve B is steeper than curve A. So the reaction was faster for B.
2
 In B, the reaction lasts for 60 seconds. In A it lasts for 120 seconds.
3
 Both reactions produced 60 cm3 of hydrogen. Do you agree?
4
 So in B the average rate was 1 cm3 of hydrogen per second. (60  60)
 In A it was 0.5 cm3 of hydrogen per second. (60  120)
 The average rate in B was twice the average rate in A.
 So in this example, doubling the concentration doubled the rate.
These results show that:
A reaction goes faster when the concentration of a reactant is increased.This means you can also slow down a reaction, by reducing concentration. Bleach r eacts with coloured substances. 
The more concentrated the solution of bleach, the faster this stain will disappear.The speed of a reac
T
ion
134
Ways to change the rate of a reaction
There are several ways to speed up or slow down a reaction. For example 
you could change the concentration of a reactant, or the temperature.  The rate will change - but the amount of product you obtain will not. 
1 By changing c oncentration
Here you will see how rate changes with the concentration of a reactant.
The method
 Repeat the experiment from page 
131 twice (A and B 
below). Keep everything the same each time except the concentration of 
the acid. In B it is twice as concentrated as in A.Changing the rate of a reaction (part I)

--- Page 136 ---
View from above the beaker:
The cross grows fainter with time
 The low temperatur e in the fridge 
slows down reactions that make food rot. 2 By changing temperatur e
Here you will see how rate changes with the temperature of the reactants.
The method
 Dilute hydrochloric acid and sodium thiosulfate solution 
react to give a fine yellow precipitate of sulfur
. You can follow the rate of 
the reaction like this:
1
 Mark a cross on a piece of paper
.
2
  Place a beaker containing sodium thiosulfate solution on top of the 
paper
, so that you can see the cross through it, from above.
3
  Quickly add hydrochloric acid, start a clock at the same time, and measure the temperature of the mixture. 
4
 The cross grows fainter as the precipitate forms. Stop the clock 
 
 the moment you can no longer see the cross. Note the time.
5
  Now repeat steps 1
 –
 4 several times, changing 
only the temperature. 
You do this by heating the sodium thiosulfate solution to different temperatures, before adding the acid.
The results
 This table shows some typical results:
The cross disappears when enough sulfur has formed to hide it.  This took 200 seconds at 20
 °C, but only 50 seconds at 40
 °C.
 
So the reaction is four times faster at 40
 °C than at 20
 °C.
A reaction goes faster when the temperature is raised. When the temperature increases by 10
 °C, the rate generally doubles.
That it why food cooks much faster in pressure cookers than in ordinary saucepans. (The temperature in a pressure cooker can reach 125
 °C.)
 
And if you want to slow a reaction down, of course, you can lower the  temperature.Temperature  / °C 20 30 40 50 60
T
ime for cross to disappear
 /
 seconds 200 125 50 33 24
Q
1 Look at the graph on the opposite page.
 a
 How much hydr
ogen was obtained after 2 minutes in:
  
i
 experiment A?
 ii
  experiment B?
 b
  How can you tell which r
eaction was faster, from the 
shape of the curves?
2 Explain why experiments A and B both gave the same 
amount of hydr
ogen.3  Copy and complete: A r eaction goes …… when the 
concentration of a …… is increased. It also goes …… when the …… is raised.
4 Raising the temperatur e speeds up a reaction. Try to give 
two (new) examples of how this is used in everyday life.
5 What happens to the rate of a r eaction when the 
temperature is lowered? How do we make use of this?
 Oh dear . Oven too hot? Reactions faster than expected?The higher the temperature, the faster the cross disappears
135The speed of a reac Tion

--- Page 137 ---
10.4
3 By changing surf ace area
In many reactions, one reactant is a solid. The reaction between 
hydrochloric acid and calcium carbonate (marble chips) is an example. Carbon dioxide gas is produced:
CaCO
3 (s) 1 2HCl (aq)  CaCl2 (aq) 1 H2O (l) 1 CO2 (g)
The rate can be measured using the apparatus on the right.
The method
 Place the marble in the flask and add the acid. Quickly plug 
the flask with cotton wool to stop any liquid splashing out. Then weigh it, 
starting the clock at the same time. Note the mass at regular intervals until the reaction is complete. 
Carbon dioxide is a heavy gas. It escapes through the cotton wool, which 
means that the flask gets lighter as the reaction proceeds. So by weighing the flask at regular intervals, you can follow the rate of reaction.
The experiment is repeated twice. Everything is kept exactly the same 
each time, except the 
surface area of the marble chips.light plug of
cotton wool
ﬂask with acidand marble chips
balance stopclock
2
1
01 23456 7
Time/minutesLoss in mass/grams
The results for experiments 1 and 22 (small chips)
1 (large chips)For experiment 1, large chips are 
used. Their surface area is the total area of exposed surface.For experiment 2, the same mass of marble is used – but the chips are small so the surface area is greater.
The results
 The results of the two experiments are plotted here:
So what can you conclude about surface area? Did it af
fect the rate of  
the reaction?The speed of a reac Tion
136
Changing the rate of a reaction (part II)
!How to draw the graph
First you have to find the loss in mass 
at different times:
loss in mass at a given time 5  
mass at start 2 mass at that time
Then you plot the values for loss in 
mass against time.

--- Page 138 ---
  A fir e at a grain silo in Ghent, 
Belgium, after wheat dust exploded. Several people were injured.Notice these things about the results:
1
  Curve 2 is steeper than curve 1. This shows that the reaction is faster for the small chips.
2
  In both experiments, the final loss in mass is 2.0 grams. In other words, 2.0 grams of carbon dioxide are produced each time.
3
  For the small chips, the reaction is complete in 4 minutes. For the large chips, it takes 6 minutes.
These results show that:
 
The rate of a reaction increases when the surface area of a solid reactant is increased.
Explosion!
As you have seen, you can increase the rate of a reaction by increasing:
 the concentration of a reactant 
 the temperature 
 the surface area of a solid reactant 
In some situations, an increase in any of these can lead to a dangerously fast reaction. Y
ou get an explosion. Here are examples.
In flour mills
 Flour particles are 
tiny, so flour has a very large surface 
area. It can also catch fire. In a flour mill, if there is a lot of flour dust in the air, a spark from a machine could be enough to cause an explosion.
For the same reason, explosions are a risk in wood mills, from wood dust, 
and in silos where wheat and other grains are stored. And in factories that make custard powder, and dried milk. The dust from all these will burn. 
In coal mines
 In coal mines, methane (CH4) and other flammable gases 
collect in the air. At certain concentrations they form an explosive mix 
with the air. A spark is enough to set off an explosion.
Q
1 This question is about the graph on the opposite page. 
For
 each experiment find:
 a
 the mass of carbon dioxide pr
oduced in the first minute
 b
  the average rate of pr
oduction of the gas, for the 
complete reaction.2 a  Which has the largest surface ar ea: 1 g of large marble 
chips, or 1 g of small marble chips?
 b
  Which 1
 g sample will disappear first when reacted with 
excess hydrochloric acid? Why?
3 Explain why fine flour dust in the air is a hazar d, in flour  mills. 
 In the old days, miners used candles 
to see their way undergr
ound – which 
caused many explosions. Now they use sealed lamps powered by batteries.
137The speed of a reac Tion

--- Page 139 ---
10.5
acid
particle
watermolecule
magnesium
atomsreactiontakes placeacidparticle
watermolecule
magnesium
atoms reactiontakes placeacidparticle
watermolecule
magnesium
atoms reactiontakes place
acidparticle
watermolecule
magnesium
atomsacidparticle
watermolecule
magnesium
atomsThe particles in the liquid move 
non-stop. To react, an acid particle must collide with a magnesium atom, and bonds must break. 
In dilute acid, there are not so 
many acid particles. So there is less chance of an acid particle hitting a magnesium atom.This collision has enough energy to break bonds. So it is successful. The particles react and new bonds form, giving magnesium chloride and hydrogen.
Here the acid is more concentrated – there are more acid particles. So there is now more chance of a successful collision.But this collision did not have enough energy. It was not successful. No bonds were broken. The acid particle just bounced away again.
If there are lots of successful collisions in a given minute, then a lot of hydrogen is produced in that minute. In other words, the rate of reaction is high. If there are not many, the rate of reaction is low. 
The rate of a reaction depends on how many successful collisions 
there are in a given unit of time.
Changing the rate of a reaction
Why rate increases with concentration  If the concentration of the acid 
is increased, the reaction goes faster
. It is easy to see why:
The more successful collisions there are, the faster the reaction.
!Reactions between gases
 When you increase the pressure 
on two reacting gases, it means you squeeze more gas molecules into a given space.
 So there is a greater chance of successful collisions.
 So if pressure   then rate   for  
a gaseous reaction.The speed of a reac
T
ion
138
Explaining rates
The collision theory
Magnesium and dilute hydrochloric acid react together like this:
magnesium 1 hydrochloric acid  magnesium chloride 1 hydrogen
 Mg (
s)
 1
 2HCl (
aq)
  MgCl2 (aq)  1  H2 (g)
In order for the magnesium and acid particles to react together:
 the particles must collide with each other , and
  the collision must have enough energy to be successful. In other 
words, enough energy to break bonds to allow reaction to occur
.
This is called the collision theory. It is shown by the drawings below.

--- Page 140 ---
acid particle
water
molecule
magnesium
atoms
TimeVolume of hydrogenacid particle
water
molecule
magnesium
atoms
TimeVolume of hydrogenacid particle
water
molecule
magnesium
atoms
TimeVolume of hydrogen
reactiontakes place
TimeVolume of hydrogenfaster reaction at higher temperature 
watermoleculeacid
particle
magnesium
atomsreactiontakes place
TimeVolume of hydrogenfaster reaction at higher temperature 
watermoleculeacid
particle
magnesium
atomsreactiontakes place
TimeVolume of hydrogenfaster reaction at higher temperature 
watermoleculeacid
particle
magnesium
atoms
acid particle
watermolecule
magnesium
atomsacid particle
watermolecule
magnesium
atomsAt the start, there are plenty of 
magnesium atoms and acid particles. But they get used up in successful collisions.
This makes the acid particles move faster – so they collide more often with magnesium particles. 
The acid particles can collide only 
with the magnesium atoms in the outer layer of the metal ribbon. After a time, there are fewer magnesium atoms, and the acid is less concentrated. So there is less chance of successful collisions.
The extra energy also means that more collisions are successful. So the reaction rate increases. 
In the powdered metal, many more atoms are exposed. So the chance of a collision increases.As a result, the slope of the reaction curve decreases with time, as shown above. It goes flat when the reaction is over.
In fact, as you saw earlier, the rate generally doubles for an increase in temperature of 10
 °C. That idea also explains why the reaction between magnesium and hydrochloric acid slows down 
over time:
Why rate increases with temperature
 On heating, 
all the particles take 
in heat energy.
Why rate increases with surface area
 The reaction between the 
magnesium and acid is much faster when the metal is powdered:
Q
1 Copy and complete: T wo particles can react together only if 
they …… and the …… has enough …… to be …….
2 What is meant by:
 a a successful collision?
 b an unsuccessful collision?3 Reaction between magnesium and acid speeds up when:
 a the concentration of the acid is doubled. Why?
 b the temperatur
e is raised. Why?
 c the acid is stirr
ed. Why?
 d the metal is gr
ound to a powder. Why?
139The speed of a reac Tion

--- Page 141 ---
10.6
 Many dif ferent substances can act as 
catalysts. They are usually made into 
shapes that offer a very large surface area. 

 Enzyme molecules ar
e large and 
complex, as this model shows. 
splint
relights
manganese(IV)
oxideglowing splint
hydrogen
peroxide
solution
raw liversplint
relightsfroth
splint
relights
manganese(IV)
oxideglowing splint
hydrogen
peroxide
solution
raw liversplint
relightsfroth
splint
relights
manganese(IV)oxideglowing splint
hydrogen
peroxide
solution
raw liversplint
relightsfroth
Since hydrogen peroxide breaks 
down very slowly, there is not enough oxygen to relight the splint.Manganese(IV) oxide makes the reaction go thousands of times faster. The splint bursts into flame.Raw liver also speeds it up. The liquid froths as the oxygen bubbles off – and the splint relights.The speed of a reac Tion
140
Catalysts
What is a catalyst?
You saw that a reaction can be speeded up by increasing the temperature, or the concentration of a reactant, or the surface area of a solid reactant.
There is another way to increase the rate of some reactions: use a catalyst. A catalyst is a substance that speeds up a chemical reaction, but 
remains chemically unchanged itself.
Example: the decomposition of hydrogen peroxide
Hydrogen peroxide is a colourless liquid that breaks down very slowly to water and oxygen: 
 hydrogen peroxide
  water  1 oxygen
 2H2O2 (l)  2H2O (l) 1  O2 (g)
You can show how a catalyst affects the reaction, like this:
1
 Pour some hydrogen peroxide into three measuring cylinders. 
 
 The first one is the control.
2
 Add manganese(IV) oxide to the second, and raw liver to the third. 
3
 Now use a glowing wooden splint to test the cylinders for oxygen. 
 The splint will burst into flame if there is enough oxygen present. 
The results
So manganese(IV) oxide acts as a catalyst for the reaction. If you add 
more manganese(IV) oxide, the reaction will go even faster.
Something in the raw liver acts as a catalyst too. That ‘something’ is an 
enzyme called catalase.
What are enzymes?
Enzymes are proteins made by cells, to act as biological catalysts. Enzymes are found in every living thing. You have thousands of different enzymes inside you. For example catalase speeds up the decomposition of hydrogen peroxide in your cells, before it can harm you. Amylase in your saliva speeds up the breakdown of the starch in your food. 
Without enzymes, most of the reactions that take place in your body 
would be far too slow at body temperature. You would die.

--- Page 142 ---
How do catalysts work?
For a reaction to take place, the reacting particles must collide with 
enough energy for bonds to break and reaction to occur. 
When a catalyst is present, the reactants are able to react in a way that 
requires less energy. 
This means that more collisions now have enough energy to be successful. 
So the reaction speeds up. But the catalyst itself is unchanged.
Note that a catalyst must be chosen to suit the particular reaction.  
It may not work for other reactions. 
Catalysts in the chemical industry
In industry, many reactions need heat. Fuel can be a very big expense. 
With a catalyst, a reaction goes faster at a given temperature. So you get 
the product faster, saving time. Even better, it may go fast enough at a lower temperature – which means a lower fuel bill.
So catalysts are very important in the chemical industry. They are often 
transition elements or their oxides. Two examples are:
 iron used in the manufacture of ammonia
 vanadium (IV) oxide used in the manufacture of sulfuric acid.
Q
1 What is a catalyst?
2 Which of these does a catalyst not change?
 a the speed of a r
eaction  
 
 b the pr
oducts that form
 c the total amount of each pr
oduct formed
3 Explain what an enzyme is, and give an example.4 Why do our bodies need enzymes?
5 Catalysts ar e very important in industry. Explain why.
6 Give two examples of catalysts used in the chemical   
industry
.
7 A box of biological detergent had this instruction on the  
back: Do not use in a wash above 60 °
 C. Suggest a r
eason.Making use of enzymes
There are thousands of different enzymes, made by living things. We are finding many uses for them.
For example some bacteria make enzymes that 
catalyse the breakdown of fat, starch, and proteins. The bacteria can be grown in tanks, in factories.  The enzymes are removed, and used in biological detergents. In the wash, they help to break down grease, food stains, and blood stains on clothing.
Enzymes work best in conditions like those in the 
living cells that made them. 
 If the temperature gets too high, the enzyme is  
 destroyed or 
denatured. It loses its shape.
 An enzyme also works best in a specific pH range.   
 Y
ou can denature it by adding acid or alkali.
 Now add a biological detergent? But do not use them for 
wool or silk, as they cause the pr
oteins in these to break down.   A catalyst of platinum and rhodium,
 
in the form of a gauze, is being fitted into 
a tank. It will catalyse the production of nitric acid from ammonia and oxygen. 
!More means faster
The more catalyst you add, the faster the reaction goes.
141The speed of a reac Tion

--- Page 143 ---
s 
142The speed of a reac Tion
More about enzymes
Mainly from microbes
Enzymes are proteins made by living things, to act as catalysts for their 
own reactions. So we can obtain enzymes from plants, and animals, and microbes such as bacteria and fungi. In fact we get most from microbes.
Traditional uses for enzymes 
We humans have used enzymes for thousands of years. For example …
 In making bread  Bread dough contains yeast (a fungus), and sugar .
  When the dough is left in a warm place, the yeast cells feed on the sugar to obtain energy
. Enzymes in the yeast catalyse the reaction, 
which is called fermentation:
 C6H12O6 (aq)         2C2H5OH (aq)  1  2CO2 (g) 1  energy
 
glucose
 ethanol
 carbon dioxide
  The carbon dioxide gas makes the dough rise. Later
, in the hot oven, 
the gas expands even more, while the bread sets. So you end up with spongy bread. The heat kills the yeast off.
  In making yoghurt  T o make yoghurt, special bacteria are added to 
milk. They feed on the lactose (sugar) in it, to obtain energy. Their enzymes catalyse its conversion to lactic acid and other substances, which turn the milk into yoghurt.
Making enzymes the modern way 
In making bread and yoghurt, the microbes that make the enzymes are present. But in most modern uses for enzymes, they are not. Instead:
  bacteria and other microbes are grown in tanks, in a rich broth of 
nutrients; so they multiply fast
 then they are killed of f, and their enzymes are separated and purified 
 the enzymes are sold to factories.catalysed
by enzymes
 Y east cells. Cells are living things, but 
the enzymes they make are not. Enzymes are just chemicals (proteins).

 The holes in br
ead are where carbon 
dioxide gas expanded.

 Anyone home? The tank contains bacteria, busy making enzymes. For example 
 
it could be the enzyme amylase, that catalyses the conversion of starch to sugar.
 The amylase is sold to a company that 
uses it to make a sweet syrup fr
om corn 
(maize) flour. The syrup is used in biscuits, 
cakes, soft drinks, and sauces.

--- Page 144 ---
s 
143The speed of a reac Tion
Modern uses of enzymes
Enzymes have many different uses. Here are some common ones:
  In making soft-centred chocolates  How do they get the runny 
centres
 into chocolates? By using the enzyme invertase.
  First they make a paste containing sugars, water
, flavouring, colouring, 
and invertase. Then they dip blobs of it into melted chocolate, which 
hardens. Inside, the invertase catalyses the breakdown of the sugars  to more soluble ones, so the paste goes runny.
 
 Other enzymes are used in a similar way to ‘soften’ food, to make tinned food for infants.
  In making stone-washed denim  Once, denim was given a worn look 
by scrubbing it with pumice stone. Now an enzyme does the job.
  In making biological detergents  As you saw on page  141, these 
contain enzymes to catalyse the breakdown of grease and stains.
  In DNA testing  Suppose a criminal leaves tiny traces of skin or blood 
at a crime scene. The enzyme 
polymerase is used to ‘grow’ the DNA in 
them, to give enough to identify the criminal.
How do they work? 
This shows how an enzyme molecule catalyses the breakdown of a reactant molecule:
molecules
of productenzyme molecule
unchangedreactant moleculebreaking down reactant
moleculeenzymemolecule
molecules
of productenzyme moleculeunchangedreactant moleculebreaking down reactantmolecule enzymemolecule
molecules
of productenzyme molecule
unchangedreactant moleculebreaking down reactantmolecule enzymemolecule Thanks to invertase …

 Thanks to polymerase …
 Many bacteria live ar
ound hot vents in 
the ocean floor – in water at up to 400
 °C.First, the two molecules must fit 
together like jigsaw pieces.  (So the reactant molecule must be the right shape, for the enzyme.) The ‘complex’ that forms makes it easy for the reactant molecule to break down. You  do not need to 
provide energy by heating.When decomposition is complete the molecules of the product move away. Another molecule of the reactant takes their place.
Enzymes are a much more complex shape than the drawing suggests. Even so, this model gives you a good idea of how they work.
The search for extremophiles 
Most of the enzymes we use work around 40  °C, and at a pH not far from  7. 
In other words, in conditions like those in the cells that made them.
But around the world, scientists are searching high and low for microbes 
that live in very harsh conditions. For example deep under the ice in Antarctica, or at hot vents in the ocean floor, or in acidic lakes around volcanoes. They call these microbes extremophiles.
Why do scientists want them? Because the enzmyes made by these 
microbes make will work in the same harsh conditions. So they may find a great many uses in industry.

--- Page 145 ---
10.7
Some reactions need light
Some chemical reactions obtain the energy they need from light. They are 
called photochemical reactions. Examples are photosynthesis, and the reactions that occur in film photography. 
Photosynthesis
  Photosynthesis is the reaction between carbon dioxide and water, in 
the presence of chlorophyll and sunlight, to produce glucose:
 
6CO2 (g) 1  6H2O (l)  C6H12O6 (aq)  1  6O2 (g)
 carbon dioxide
  water
  
glucose
 oxygen
  It takes place in plant leaves. Carbon dioxide enters the leaves through  
tiny holes called stomata.
 Chlorophyll , the green pigment in leaves, is a catalyst for the reaction.
 The water is taken in from the soil, through the plant’ s roots.
 Sunlight provides the energy for this endothermic reaction.
  The plant then uses the glucose for energy , and to build the cellulose 
and other substances it needs for growth.
Changing the rate of the photosynthesis reaction
Could you change the rate by changing the strength of the light? Let’s see. 
The method
 Pondweed is a suitable plant to use for the experiment. 
distance measuredvery dilute
solution of sodiumhydrogen carbonate
pondweedbubbles
of oxygentest-tube ﬁlter funnel
lamp
1  Put some pondweed in a beaker containing a very dilute solution of 
sodium 
hydrogen carbonate, NaHCO3. (This compound decomposes, 
giving off carbon dioxide.) Place a funnel over it.
2
 Place a test-tube full of the solution over the funnel, as shown.
3
 Place the lamp 50 cm from the beaker
. (Look at the arrow above.)
4
  Let the pondweed adjust to the conditions for 1 minute. Then count the bubbles of oxygen it gives of
f, over 1 minute. Repeat twice more to get 
an average value per minute. Record your results. 
5
 Repeat step 4
, with the lamp placed at 40, 30, 20, and 10 cm from  
 the beaker
. 
You can then plot a graph for your results.light
chlorophyll
 The stomata of a leaf, magnified by 
about 700. Carbon dioxide passes in 
thr
ough them, and oxygen passes out.

 The plant on the right is unhealthy
 
because it did not get enough light – so it made glucose too slowly. The speed of a reac Tion
144
Photochemical reactions

--- Page 146 ---
 A 'negative' portrait in silver particles.  
What will the printed photo show? The results  Th is graph shows that the  
number of bubbles per minute increases as  
the lamp is brought closer to the plant. 
The closer it is, the greater the strength or 
intensity of the light that reaches the plant.  So we can say that the rate of photosynthesis increases as the intensity of the light increases.
That makes sense. Light provides the energy 
for the reaction. The stronger it is, the more energy it provides. So more molecules of carbon dioxide and water gain enough energy to react. 
A photochemical reaction can be speeded  
up by increasing the intensity of the light.
This is true of all photochemical reactions.
The reactions in film photography
Black-and-white film photography relies on a photochemical reaction. 
The film is covered with a coating of gel that contains tiny grains of silver bromide. Light causes this to break down:
2AgBr (s) 
 2Ag (s) 1 Br2 (l)
It is both a photochemical reaction and a redox reaction.
The silver ions are reduced:
 2Ag
 1 1 2e  2  2Ag   (electron gain)
The bromide ions are oxidised:
 2Br
 2  Br2 1 2e  2   (electron loss)
So how is a photo produced?
1 When you click to take the photo, the camera shutter opens briefly . 
 
 
Light enters and strikes the film. The silver bromide decomposes, giving tiny dark particles of silver. Where brighter light strikes (from brighter parts of the scene), decomposition is faster, giving more silver. 
2
  Next the film is 
developed: unreacted silver bromide is washed away, 
leaving clear areas on the film. The silver remains, giving darker areas.
3
  Then the film is printed. In this step, light is shone through the film onto
 photographic paper, which is also coated with silver bromide.  
The light passes through the clear areas of the film easily, causing the silver bromide to decompose. But the darker areas block light. 
4
  The unreacted silver bromide is washed from the paper
. This leaves a 
black-and-white image of the original scene, made of silver particles.01 02 03 04 05 0
Distance of lamp from plant (cm)Average number of bubbles / min
The result of the photosynthesis experiment120
100
80604020180160140200
Q
1 What is a photochemical reaction? Give two examples.
2 a W rite down the equation for photosynthesis.
 b What is the purpose of the chlor
ophyll?
 c Str
onger light speeds up photosynthesis. Why?3 a Why is silver br omide used in photographic film?
 b Its decomposition is a r
edox reaction. Explain why. 
4 The more intense the light, the faster the photochemical  
r
eaction. Explain how this idea is used in photography with film.
145The speed of a reac Tion

--- Page 147 ---
Checkup on Chapter 10
Questions
Core curriculum
1 The rate of the reaction between magnesium and 
dilute hydrochloric acid can be measured using this apparatus:
test tube containing magnesium
excess dilute hydrochloric acidgas syringe
 a What is the purpose of:
  
i
 the test
-tube?
 ii
 the gas syringe?
 b
 How would you get the reaction to start?
2
 Some magnesium and an 
excess of dilute 
hydrochloric acid were reacted together. 
 The volume of hydrogen produced was recorded 
every minute, as shown in the table:
Time  /  min  0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7
Volume of 
hydrogen  /
cm30 14 23 31 38 40 40 40
 a What does an excess of acid mean?
 b
 Plot a graph of the results.
 c
  What is the 
rate of reaction (in cm3 of hydrogen 
per minute) during:
  
i
 the first minute?
  
ii
 the second minute?
  
iii
 the third minute?
 d
 Why does the rate change during the reaction?
 e
 How much hydrogen was produced in total?
 
 f
 How long does the reaction last?
 g
 What is the 
average rate of the reaction?
 h
  How could you 
slow down the reaction, while 
keeping the amounts of reactants unchanged?
3
 Suggest a reason for each observation below
.
 a
  Hydrogen peroxide decomposes much faster in the presence of the enzyme catalase.
 b
  The reaction between manganese carbonate and dilute hydrochloric acid speeds up when some concentrated hydrochloric acid is added.
 c
  
Powdered magnesium is used in fireworks, rather than magnesium ribbon.Revision checklist
Core curriculum
Make sure you can …
 explain what the rate of a reaction means
 describe a way to measure the rate of a reaction that produces a gas, using a gas syringe
 describe a way to measure the rate of a reaction that produces carbon dioxide (a heavy gas), using a
 balance 
 give the correct units for the rate of a given reaction  
(for example cm3 per minute, or grams per minute)
 work out, from the graph for a reaction:
 –
 how long the reaction lasted
 –
 how much product was obtained
 –
 the average rate of the reaction
 –
 the rate in any given minute
 give three ways to increase the rate of a reaction
 say which of two reaction s was faster, by 
comparing the slope of their curves on a graph 
 explain why there is a risk of explosions in flour mills and coal mines
 explain these terms:  catalyst  enzyme
 explain why enzymes are important in our bodies
 explain why catalysts are important in industry
 give examples of the use of catalysts, including    
enzymes
Extended curriculum
Make sure you can also …
 describe the collision theory
 use the collision theory to explain why the rate of a 
reaction increases with concentration, temperature,  
and surface area 
 explain how catalysts work
 say how enzymes can be destroyed
 define photochemical reaction and give examples
 say what photosynthesis is, and give the word and    
chemical equations for it
 name the catalyst for photosynthesis
 explain why a photochemical reaction can be speeded up by increasing the intensity of the light 
 give the equation for the photochemical reaction that takes place on black-and-white film and photographic paper
 show that this reaction is also a redox reactionThe speed of a reac Tion
146


--- Page 148 ---
4 In two separate experiments, two metals A and B 
were reacted with an excess of dilute hydrochloric acid. The volume of hydrogen was measured every 10 seconds. These graphs show the results: 
TimeVolume of
hydrogenA B
0
 a i   Which piece of apparatus can be used to measure the volume of hydrogen produced?
  
ii
 What other measuring equipment is needed?
 
 b
  Which metal, A or B, reacts faster with hydrochloric acid? 
Give your evidence. 
 c
  Sketch and label the curves that will be obtained for metal B if: 
  
i
 more concentrated acid is used (curve X)
  
ii
  the reaction is carried out at a lower temperature (curve Y)
5
 Copper(II) oxide catalyses the decomposition of hydrogen peroxide. 0.5 g of the oxide was added to a flask containing 100 cm
3 of hydrogen peroxide 
solution. A gas was released. It was collected, and its volume noted every 10 seconds. 
 This table shows the results:
Time  /  s 0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90
V
olume
 /
 cm30 18 30 40 48 53 57 58 58 58
 a What is a catalyst?
 b
  Draw a diagram of suitable apparatus for this experiment.
 c
 Name the gas that is formed.
 d
  W
rite a balanced equation for the 
decomposition of hydrogen peroxide.
 e
  Plot a graph of the volume of gas (vertical axis) against time (horizontal axis).
 f
 Describe how rate changes during the reaction.
 g
  What happens to the concentration of hydrogen peroxide as the reaction proceeds?
 h
  What chemicals are present in the flask after 90
 seconds?
 i
  What mass of copper(II) oxide would be left in the flask at the end of the reaction?
 j
  Sketch on your graph the curve that might be obtained for 1.0 g of copper(II) oxide.
 k
  Name one other substance that catalyses this decomposition.Extended curriculum
6 Marble chips (lumps of calcium carbonate) react with hydrochloric acid as follows:
 CaCO3 (s) 1 2HCl (aq)   
    CaCl2 (aq) 1 CO2 (g) 1 H2O (l)
 a
 What gas is released during this reaction?
 b
  Describe a laboratory method that could be used to investigate the rate of the reaction.
 c
 How will this af
fect the rate of the reaction?
  
i
 increasing the temperature
  ii
 adding water to the acid
 d
  Explain each of the ef
fects in c in terms of 
collisions between reacting particles.
 e
  If the lumps of marble are crushed first, will the reaction rate change? Explain your answer
.
7
 Zinc and iodine solution react like this:
 Zn (
s) 1 I2 (aq)  ZnI2 (aq)
 The rate of reaction can be followed by measuring the mass of zinc metal at regular intervals, until all the iodine has been used up.
 a
  What will happen to the mass of the zinc, as the reaction proceeds?
 b
  Which reactant is in excess? Explain your choice.
 c
 The reaction rate slows down with time. Why? 
 d
  Sketch a graph showing the mass of zinc on the y
 axis, and time on the x axis.
 e
  How will the graph change if the temperature of the iodine solution is increased by 10
 °C?
 f
  Explain your answer to 
e using the idea of 
collisions between particles.
8
 Some pondweed 
is placed as shown:
test-tubegas collects
bubbles
pond weed
water containing
dissolvedcarbon dioxide
 a i  Name the gas that collects in the test tube
  
ii
 What other product is produced?
 b
  This experiment must be carried out in the light. 
Why?
 c
  Using the apparatus above, suggest a method by which the rate of reaction could be found.
 d
  What would be the ef
fect of bringing a lamp 
close to the beaker? Explain your answer.The speed of a reac Tion
147

--- Page 149 ---
11.1
Acids And b A ses
148
Acids and alkalis
Acids
One important group of chemicals is called acids:
You can tell if something is an acid, by its effect on litmus.
Litmus is a purple dye. It can be used as a solution, or on paper. Acids turn litmus red. 
Some common acids   
The main acids you will meet in chemistry are:
 hydrochloric acid
 HCl (
aq)
 sulfuric acid
 H2SO4 (aq)
 nitric acid
 HNO3 (aq)
 ethanoic acid
 CH3COOH (aq)
But there are many others. For example, lemon and lime juice contain citric acid, ant stings contain methanoic acid, and fizzy drinks contain carbonic acid, formed when carbon dioxide dissolves in water.
Alkalis
There is another group of chemicals that also affect litmus, but in a different way. They are the alkalis.Alkalis turn litmus blue.Like acids, they must be handled carefully. They too can burn skin.
Some common alkalis
The pure alkalis are solids – except for ammonia, which is a gas. They are used in the lab as aqueous solutions. The main ones you will meet are:
 sodium hydroxide
 NaOH (
aq)
 potassium hydroxide
 KOH (
aq)
 calcium hydroxide
 Ca(OH)2 (aq)
 
ammonia
 NH3 (aq)You have probably seen these acids in the lab. They are all solutions of pure compounds in water. They can be dilute, like these, or concentrated.They must be handled carefully, especially the concentrated solutions, because they are corrosive. They can eat away metals, skin, and cloth.But some acids are not so corrosive, even when concentrated. These are called weak acids. Ethanoic acid is one example. It is found in vinegar.
 Testing with litmus paper.
 Common laboratory alkalis.  
The solution of calcium hydroxide is 
called limewater.
!Remember:
acid turns litmus red
blue litmus paper 
goes red in an acid solutionpink litmus paper goes blue in an alkaline solution


--- Page 150 ---
149Acids And b A ses
Indicators
Litmus is called an indicator, because it indicates  
whether something is an acid or an alkali. This table  shows two others. All show a colour change from  acid to alkali. That’s why they are used!
Neutral substances
Many substances are not acids or alkalis. They are neutral. Examples are pure water, and aqueous solutions of sodium chloride and sugar.
The pH scale
You can say how acidic or alkaline a solution is using a scale of numbers called the pH scale. The numbers go from 0 to 14:
pH numbers for acidic solutions
the smaller the number, the more acidic the solution the larger the number, the more alkaline the solutionneutral
  pH numbers for alkaline solutionsIndicator Colour in acid Colour in alkali
litmus
phenolphthaleinmethyl orangered
redblue
pink
yellowcolourless
On this scale:
An acidic solution has a pH number less than 7.
An alkaline solution has a pH number greater than 7.A neutral solution has a pH number of exactly 7.
Universal indicator paper
You can find the pH of any solution by using universal indicator. This is a mixture of dyes. Like litmus, it can be used as a solution, or a paper strip.  
Its colour changes with pH, as shown here: 
Q
1 What does corrosive mean?
2 How would you test a substance, to see if it is an acid?
3 W rite down the formula for:
 sulfuric acid
  nitric acid
 calcium hydr
oxide
 ammonia solution4 Phenolpthalein is an indicator. What does that mean?
5 What does this pH value tell you about the solution?
 a
 9
    
b
 4
    
c
 7
    
d
 1
    
 e
 10
    
f
 3
6 What colour is universal indicator , in an aqueous solution  
of sugar? Why?
1 2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9  10  11  12  13r
ed
 orange
 yellow
 
yellowish-
 gr
een
 
greenish-
 blue
 
violet 
  
 gr
een
  blue

--- Page 151 ---
11.2
Acids And b A ses
150A closer look at acids and alkalis
Acids produce hydrogen ions
Hydrogen chloride is a gas, made of molecules. It dissolves in water to 
give hydrochloric acid. But this is not molecular. In water, the molecules break up or dissociate into ions:
 HCl (
aq) 
   H 1 (aq) 1 Cl  2 (aq)
So hydrochloric acid contains hydrogen ions. All other solutions of acids do too. The hydrogen ions give them their ‘acidity’.  Solutions of acids contain hydrogen ions.
 
Comparing acids
Since solutions of acids contain ions, they conduct electricity. We can measure how well they conduct using a conductivity meter. We can also check their pH using a pH meter. 
Samples of acids of the same concentration were tested. This table gives 
the results. (The unit of conductivity is the siemens, or S.)
Acid For a 0.1  M solution …       
conductivity (µS
 / cm) pH
hydr
ochloric acid 25 1.0
sulfuric acid 40 0.7 strong acids
nitric acid 25 1.0
methanoic acid 2 2.4
ethanoic acid 0.5 2.9 weak acids
citric acid 4 2.1
!Remember!
Acidic solutions contain hydrogen 
ions:
H+
It is what makes them ‘acidic’.
 The conductivity meter measures  
the current passing through the liquid,  
carried by ions. (Lemon juice contains hydrogen ions and citrate ions.) 
 Strong and weak: the car battery 
contains sulfuric acid, and the oranges contain citric acid. So the acids fall into two groups. The first group shows high conductivity, 
and low pH. These are strong acids. The second group does not conduct nearly so well, and has a higher pH. These are weak acids.
The difference between strong and weak acids
In a solution of hydrochloric acid, all the molecules of hydrogen chloride have become ions:
 HCl (
aq)   100%
  H 1 (aq) 1 Cl  2 (aq)
But in weak acids, only some of the molecules have become ions. For example, for ethanoic acid:
 
CH3COOH (aq)  much less than 100%
 H 1 (aq) 1 CH3COO  2 (aq)
In solutions of strong acids, all the molecules become ions.  In solutions of weak acids, only some do.
So strong acids conduct better because there are more ions present.  
They have a lower pH because there are more hydrogen ions present.
The higher the concentration of hydrogen ions, the lower the pH.


--- Page 152 ---
Alkalis produce hydroxide ions
Now let’s turn to alkalis, with sodium hydroxide as our example.  
It is an ionic solid. When it dissolves, all the ions separate:
 NaOH (
aq)
 
   Na 1 (aq) 1 OH  2 (aq)
So sodium hydroxide solution contains hydroxide ions.  The same is true of all alkaline solutions. Solutions of alkalis contain hydroxide ions.
 
Comparing alkalis
We can compare the conductivity and pH of alkalis too. Look at these results:
151Acids And b A ses
Q
1 W rite an equation to show what happens when hydrogen 
chloride dissolves in water.
2 All acids have something in common. What is it?
3 For the table on page 150, explain why ethanoic acid has:  
a
 lower conductivity
 b
 a higher pH
 than hydr
ochloric acid.4 What do all alkaline solutions have in common?
5 W rite an equation to show what happens when ammonia 
gas dissolves in water.
6 For the table above, explain why the ammonia solution has:  
a
 lower conductivity
 b
 a lower pH
 than the potassium hydr
oxide solution.Alkali For a 0.1  M solution …       
conductivity (µS
 / cm) pH
sodium hydr
oxide 20 13.0
strong alkali
potassium hydroxide 15 13.0
ammonia solution 0.5 11.1 weak alkali
!Remember!  
Alkaline solutions contain  
hydr
oxide ions:
It is what makes them alkaline.OH–
 Alkalis react with grease. So the strong 
alkali sodium hydroxide is used to clear 
blocked sinks and pipes in homes.What does the drawing tell you?The first two alkalis show high conductivity, and high pH. They are strong 
alkalis. But the ammonia solution shows much lower conductivity, and a lower pH. It is a weak alkali.
Why ammonia solution is different
In sodium hydroxide solution, all the sodium hydroxide exists as ions: 
 NaOH (
aq)   100%
   Na  1 (aq) 1 OH  2 (aq)
The same is true for potassium hydroxide. But ammonia gas is molecular. When it dissolves in water, this is what happens: 
 NH3 (aq) 1 H2O (l) much less than 100%
 NH4 1 (aq) 1 OH  2 (aq)
Only some of the ammonia molecules form ions. So there are fewer hydroxide ions present than in a sodium hydroxide solution of the same concentration.
The sodium hydroxide solution is a better conductor than the ammonia 
solution because it contains more ions. And it has a higher pH because it contains more hydroxide ions.
The higher the concentration of hydroxide ions, the higher the pH.

--- Page 153 ---
11.3
Acids And b A ses
152The reactions of acids and bases
When acids react
When acids react with metals, bases and carbonates, a salt is produced. 
Salts are ionic compounds. Sodium chloride, NaCl, is an example.
The name of the salt depends on the acid you start with:
 hydrochloric acid
 gives
 chlorides
 sulfuric acid
 gives
 sulfates
 nitric acid 
  gives
 nitrates
Typical acid reactions
1 W ith metals:  acid 1 metal    salt  1 hydrogen
 For example: 
 magnesium
 1 sulfuric acid 
   magnesium sulfate  1 hydrogen
  Mg (
s)
 1
 H2SO4 (aq)   MgSO4 (aq)  1  H2 (g)
  So the metal drives the hydrogen out of the acid, and takes its place: 
it
 displaces hydrogen. A solution of the salt magnesium sulfate is 
formed. 
2
 W
ith bases:
 acid 
1 base
    salt 1 water
  Bases
 are compounds that react with acid to give only a salt and water. 
Metal oxides and hydroxides are bases. Alkalis are soluble bases. 
 Example for an acid and alkali:
 hydrochloric acid 
1 sodium hydroxide 
   sodium chloride  1 water
 HCl (
aq)
 1
 NaOH (
aq)
  NaCl ( aq)  1  H2O (l)
 Example for an acid and insoluble base:
 
 
sulfuric acid
 1
 copper(II) oxide
  copper(II) sulfate  1  water
  H2SO4 (aq)  1  CuO ( s)   CuSO4 (aq)  1  H2O (l)
3
 W
ith carbonates:
 
 acid
 1 carbonate 
   salt  1 water 1 carbon dioxide
 For example:
 calcium
 1
 hydrochloric
  calcium  1  water  1  carbon
 
carbonate
  acid
  chloride
    dioxide
 
CaCO3 (s) 1  2HCl ( aq)   CaCl2 (aq)  1  H2O (l) 1  CO2 ( g)
Reactions of bases
1  Bases react with acids, as you saw above, giving only a salt and water. 
That is what identifies a base.
2
  Bases
 such as sodium, potassium and calcium hydroxides react with 
ammonium salts, driving out ammonia gas. For example:
 calcium
 1
 ammonium
  calcium  1  water  1  ammonia
 
hydroxide
  chloride
  chloride
 
Ca(OH)2 (s) 1  2NH4Cl (s)   CaCl2 (s) 1  2H2O (l) 1  2NH3 (g)
 This reaction is used for making ammonia in the laboratory
.
 Magnesium reacting with dilute 
sulfuric acid. Hydrogen bubbles off.
 In A, black copper(II) oxide is reacting 
with dilute sulfuric acid. The solution 
turns blue as copper(II) sulfate forms.B shows how the final solution will look.
 Calcium carbonate reacting with dilute 
hydrochloric acid. What is that gas?A B

--- Page 154 ---
153Acids And b A ses
Q
1 W rite a word equation for the reaction of dilute sulfuric  
acid with:
  
a
 zinc
  
b
 sodium carbonate
2 Which r eaction in question 1 is not a neutralisation?
3 Salts ar e ionic compounds. Name the salt that forms  
when calcium oxide reacts with hydrochloric acid, and  
say which ions it contains.
4 Zinc oxide is a base. Suggest a way to make zinc nitrate fr om 
it. Write a word equation for the reaction.5 In what ways are the reactions of hydrochloric acid with 
calcium oxide and calcium carbonate:
 a
 similar?
  
 
b
 
different? 
6 a Lime can help to contr ol acidity in soil. Why?
 b
 Name one pr
oduct that will form when it is used.
7 Zinc r eacts with hydrochloric acid to form zinc
 chloride, ZnCl2. Show that this is a redox reaction.Neutralisation
Neutralisation is a reaction with acid that gives water as well as a salt.
So the reactions of bases and carbonates with acids are neutralisations.We say the acid is neutralised.But the reactions of acids with metals are not neutralisations. Why not?
 The soil is too acidic, so the farmer is spreading lime. 
It is more soluble than limestone. Is that an advantage – or not? Making use of neutralisation 
We often make use of neutralisation outside the lab. For example, to reduce acidity in soil.  
Soil forms when rock is broken up over many years  
by the action of rain and the weather. It may be acidic because of the type of rock it came from. But rotting vegetation, and heavy use of fertilisers, can also make it acidic.
 
Most crops grow best when the pH of the soil is close to 7. If the soil is too acidic, crops grow badly or not at all. That could be a disaster for farmers. 
So to reduce its acidity
, the soil is treated with crushed 
limestone, which is calcium carbonate, or lime 
(calcium oxide) or slaked lime (calcium hydroxide).  A neutralisation reaction takes place.
Acids and redox reactions
Look again at the three groups of acid reactions. 
The reactions of acids with metals are redox reactions, because electrons 
are transferred. For example when magnesium reacts with hydrochloric acid,
 magnesium ions form. The magnesium is oxidised:
 Mg (
s) 
   Mg2 1 (aq) 1 2e 2  (oxidation is loss of electrons)
But in neutralisation reactions, no electrons are transferred. Y
ou can 
check this by looking at the oxidation states in the equation. For example, for the reaction between hydrochloric acid and sodium hydroxide:
 
   HCl (
aq) 1 NaOH (aq) 
   NaCl ( aq) 1 H2O (l) 
 1 I 2 I   1  I  2  II  1  I  1  I  2  I  1  I  2  II 
No element changes its oxidation state. So this is not a redox reaction.
In the next unit, you can find out what does go on during neutralisation.
 
 Bee stings are acidic. To neutralise the 
sting, rub on some baking soda (sodium 
hydrogen carbonate) or calamine lotion (which contains zinc carbonate).

--- Page 155 ---
11.4
Acids And b A ses
154Cl–Cl–
Cl–Cl–
Cl–Cl–water
moleculewatermolecule
H+
H+H+ Na+Na+
Na+water
molecule
OH–
OH–OH–Na+
Na+Na+
Cl–Cl–
Cl–Cl–
Cl–Cl–watermoleculewatermolecule
H+
H+H+ Na+Na+
Na+water
molecule
OH–
OH–OH–Na+
Na+Na+
Cl–Cl–
Cl–Cl–
Cl–Cl–water
moleculewater
molecule
H+
H+H+ Na+Na+
Na+watermolecule
OH–
OH–OH–Na+
Na+Na+A closer look at neutralisation
This is a solution of hydrochloric 
acid. It contains H
 1 and Cl  2 ions. 
It will turn litmus red.This is a solution of sodium hydroxide. It contains Na
  1 and 
OH
 2 ions. It will turn litmus blue. When you mix the two solutions, the OH
 2 ions and H  1 ions join to 
form water molecules. You end up with a neutral solution of sodium chloride, with no effect on litmus. 
The overall equation for this neutralisation reaction is:
   
HCl (aq) 1 NaOH (aq) 
   NaCl ( aq) 1 H2O ( l )
The ionic equation for the reaction
The best way to show what is going on in a neutralisation reaction is to write an ionic equation for it. 
The ionic equation shows just the ions that take part in the reaction. This is how to write the ionic equation for the reaction above:1
 First, write down all the ions present in the equation. 
 The drawings above will help you to do that: 
 
H
 1 (aq) 1 Cl  2 (aq) 1 Na  1 (aq) 1 OH  2 (aq)   
      Cl  2 (aq) 1 Na  1 (aq) 1 H2O (l)
2
 Now cross out any ions that appear
, unchanged, on both sides of  
 the equation.
 
H
 1 (aq)  1  Cl  2 (aq)  1  Na  1 (aq)  1  OH  1 (aq)   
                  
Cl
 1 (aq)  1  Na  1 (aq)  1  H2O (l)
  The crossed-out ions are present in the solution, but do not take part in
 
the reaction. So they are called spectator ions. 
3
 What’
s left is the ionic equation for the reaction.
 
H
 1 (aq)  1  OH  2 (aq)   H2O (l)
So an H
 1 ion combines with an OH  2 ion to produce a water molecule. 
This is all that happens during neutralisation.  
During neutralisation, H
 1 ions combine with OH  2 ions to form water 
molecules.
But an H
 1 ion is just a proton, as the drawing on the right shows.  
So, in effect, the acid donates (gives) protons to the hydroxide ions.  
The hydroxide ions accept these protons, to form water molecules. 
electron
protonproton
a hydrogen atoma hydrogen ion
is just a protonThe neutralisation of an acid by an alkali (a soluble base)
 A titration: sodium hydroxide solution 
was added to hydrochloric acid, from  
the burette. Neutralisation is complete:  the phenolphthalein has turned pink.

--- Page 156 ---
155Acids And b A ses
Q
1 a What is an ionic equation? 
 b
  Hydr
ochloric acid is neutralised by a solution of  
potassium hydroxide. 
   What do you expect the ionic equation for this 
neutralisation r
eaction to be? Write it down.
2 What ar e spectator ions?  Explain in your own words.
3 An H1 ion is just a proton. Explain why. (Do a drawing?)  
4 a Acids act as proton donors. What does that mean?
 b
 Bases act as 
proton acceptors. Explain what that means.
5 Neutralisation is not a redox reaction. Explain why, 
 using the wor
d proton in your answer.6 How to write an ionic equation:
 i
 W
rite down all the ions present in the full equation.
 ii
 Cr
oss out any that are the same on both sides of 
 the equation.
 iii
 What is left is the ionic equation. Rewrite it neatly
.
 a
 Follow steps
 i – iii for the reaction between 
 
 magnesium oxide and hydr
ochloric acid above.
 b
 Does your ionic equation match the one shown above?
 
 If so, well done!
7 Hydr ochloric acid is neutralised by a solution of sodium 
carbonate. Write the ionic equation for this reaction.Mg2+
O2–
Mg2+
O2–Mg2+
O2–
Mg2+
O2–H+
H+Cl–
Cl–water
moleculeMg2+
Mg2+
O2–Cl–
Cl–watermoleculeMg2+
O2–
Mg2+
O2–Mg2+
O2–
Mg2+
O2–H+
H+Cl–
Cl–water
moleculeMg2+
Mg2+
O2–Cl–
Cl–watermoleculeMg2+
O2–
Mg2+
O2–Mg2+
O2–
Mg2+
O2–H+
H+Cl–
Cl–watermoleculeMg2+
Mg2+
O2–Cl–
Cl–watermolecule
Magnesium oxide is a lattice of 
magnesium and oxygen ions. It is insoluble in water. But when you add dilute hydrochloric acid …… the acid donates protons to the oxide ions. The oxide ions accept them, forming water molecules. So the lattice breaks down.The magnesium ions join the chloride ions in solution. If you evaporate the water you will obtain the salt magnesium chloride. The neutralisation of an acid by an insoluble base
Magnesium oxide is insoluble. It does not produce hydroxide ions. So how does it neutralise an acid? Like this:
The equation for this neutralisation reaction is:
 2HCl (
aq) 1 MgO (s) 
   MgCl2 (aq) 1 H2O (l)
The ionic equation for it is: 
 
2H
 1 (aq) 1 O2 2 (s)  H2O (l)
Proton donors and acceptors
Now compare the ionic equations for the two neutralisations in this unit: 
 
H
 1 (aq) 1 OH  2 (aq)    H2O (l)
 
2H
 1 (aq) 1 O2 2 (s)   H2O (l)
In both:
 the protons are donated by the acids 
 ions in the bases accept them, forming water molecules. 
So this gives us a new definition for acids and bases: 
Acids are proton donors, and bases are proton acceptors. Help is at hand. Indigestion is due to 
excess hydrochloric acid in the stomach. 
Milk of Magnesia contains magnesium hydroxide, which will neutralise it.


--- Page 157 ---
11.5
What are oxides?
Oxides are compounds containing oxygen and another element. 
You have seen already that metal oxides act as bases. Here we look more closely at different types of oxides, and their behaviour. 
Basic oxides
Look how these metals react with oxygen:
Acids And b A ses
156Oxides
copper(II) oxide
heatblue litmus
turns re d
dilutehydrochloricacidlitmus stays blue
undissolved
copper(II) oxidecopper(II) oxide
heatblue litmusturns re d
dilutehydrochloricacidlitmus stays blue
undissolved
copper(II) oxidecopper(II) oxide
heatblue litmusturns re d
dilutehydrochloricacidlitmus stays blue
undissolved
copper(II) oxideMagnesium ribbon is lit over a 
Bunsen flame, and plunged into  a jar of oxygen. It burns with  a brilliant white flame, leaving  a white ash, magnesium oxide:
2Mg (s) 1 O
2 (g)  2MgO (s)
This is dilute hydrochloric acid.  
It turns blue litmus paper red, like all acids do.Hot iron wool is plunged into a gas jar of oxygen. It glows bright orange, and throws out a shower of sparks. A black solid is left in the gas jar. It is iron(III) oxide:
4Fe (s) 1 3O
2 (g)  2Fe2O3 (s)
Copper(II) oxide dissolves in it, 
when it is warmed. But after a time, no more will dissolve.Copper is too unreactive to catch fire in oxygen. But when it is heated in a stream of the gas, its surface turns black. The black substance is copper(II) oxide:
2Cu (s) 1 O
2 (g)  2CuO (s)
The resulting liquid has no effect 
on blue litmus. So the oxide has neutralised the acid.The more reactive the metal, the more vigorously it reacts. 
The copper(II) oxide produced in the last reaction above is insoluble in 
water. But it does dissolve in dilute acid:
Copper(II) oxide is called a basic oxide since it can neutralise an acid:
 base
 1
 acid
  salt  1  water
 CuO (
s)
 1
 2HCl (
aq)
  CuCl2 (aq)  1  H2O (l)
Iron(III) oxide and magnesium oxide behave in the same way – they too 
can neutralise acid, so they are basic oxides.
In general, metals react with oxygen to form basic oxides.
Basic oxides belong to the larger group of compounds called bases.
oxygen
burning magnesium
copper turningsstream of 
oxygen

--- Page 158 ---
157Acids And b A ses
Q
1 How would you show that magnesium oxide is a base?
2  Copy and complete: Metals usually form ..........  
oxides while non-metals form .......... oxides.
3 See if you can arrange carbon, phosphorus and sulfur in 
or
der of reactivity, using their reaction with oxygen. 4 What colour change would you see, on adding litmus solution to a solution of phosphorus pentoxide?
5 What is an amphoteric oxide? Give two examples.
6 Dinitr ogen oxide is a neutral oxide. It is quite soluble in water. 
How could you prove it is neutral?oxygen
burning sulfuroxygen
burning carbonoxygen
burning phosphorus
oxygen
burning sulfuroxygen
burning carbonoxygen
burning phosphorus
oxygen
burning sulfuroxygen
burning carbonoxygen
burning phosphorus
Powdered carbon is heated over  
a Bunsen burner until red-hot, then plunged into a jar of oxygen.It glows bright red, and the gas carbon dioxide is formed:
C (s) 1 O
2 (g)    CO2 (g)Sulfur catches fire over a Bunsen 
burner, and burns with a blue flame. In pure oxygen it burns even brighter. The gas sulfur dioxide is formed: 
S (s) 1 O
2 (g)    SO2 (g)Phosphorus bursts into flame in 
air or oxygen, without heating.  (So it is stored under water!) A white solid, phosphorus pentoxide, is formed:
P
4 (s) 1 5O2 (g)    P4O10 (s)Acidic oxides
Now look how these non-metals react with oxygen:
Carbon dioxide is slightly soluble in water. The solution will turn litmus 
red: it is acidic. The weak acid carbonic acid has formed: 
 
CO2 (g) 1 H2O (l)    H2CO3 (aq)
Sulfur dioxide and phosphorus pentoxide also dissolve in water to form acids. So they are all called acidic oxides.
In general, non-metals react with oxygen to form acidic oxides.
Amphoteric oxides
Aluminium is a metal, so you would expect aluminium oxide to be a base. 
In fact it is both acidic and basic. It acts as a base with hydrochloric acid:
 
Al2O3 (s) 1 6HCl (aq)     2AlCl3 (aq) 1 3H2O (l)
But it acts as an acidic oxide with sodium hydroxide, giving a compound called sodium aluminate:
 
Al2O3 (s) 1 6NaOH (aq)  2Na3AlO3 (aq) 1 3H2O (l)
So aluminium oxide is called an amphoteric oxide.  An amphoteric oxide will react with both acids and alkalis. Zinc oxide is also amphoteric. 
Neutral oxides
Some oxides of non-metals are neither acidic nor basic: they are neutral.  Neutral oxides do not react with acids or bases.
The gases carbon monoxide, CO, and dinitrogen oxide, N
2O are neutral. 
(Other nitrogen oxides are acidic.)
 Zinc oxide: an amphoteric oxide. It will 
react with both acid and alkali.acidalkali
 No pain. The neutral oxide dinitrogen 
oxide (N2O) is used as an anaesthetic by 
dentists. It is also called laughing gas.

--- Page 159 ---
11.6
You can make salts by reacting acids with metals, or insoluble bases, or 
soluble bases (alkalis), or carbonates. 
Starting with a metal
Zinc sulfate can be made by reacting dilute sulfuric acid with zinc:
 Zn (
s) 1 H2SO4 (aq)    ZnSO4 (aq) 1 H2 (g)
These are the steps:
Acids And b A ses
158Making salts 
unreacted
zinc
aqueous solutionof zinc sulfatezinc
dilute
sulfuric acidcrystalsformunreactedzinc
aqueous solutionof zinc sulfatezinc
dilute
sulfuric acidcrystalsformunreactedzinc
aqueous solutionof zinc sulfatezinc
dilute
sulfuric acidcrystalsform
blue crystalsform
aqueous solution
of copper(II) sulfateexcesscopper(II) oxide
blue solution
undissolved
copper(II) oxide
heatblue crystalsform
aqueous solution
of copper(II) sulfateexcesscopper(II) oxide
blue solution
undissolved
copper(II) oxide
heatblue crystals
form
aqueous solution
of copper(II) sulfateexcesscopper(II) oxide
blue solution
undissolved
copper(II) oxide
heat
1 Add the zinc to the acid in a 
beaker
. It starts to dissolve, and 
hydrogen bubbles off. Bubbling 
stops when all the acid is used up. 
1
 Add some copper(II) oxide to 
dilute sulfuric acid. It dissolves on warming, and the solution turns blue. Add more until no more will dissolve …2
  Some zinc is still left. (The zinc 
was 
in excess.) Remove it by 
filtering. This leaves an aqueous solution of zinc sulfate.
2
 … which means all the acid has 
now been used up. Remove the excess solid by filtering. This leaves a blue solution of copper(II) sulfate in water
.3  Heat the solution to evaporate 
some water
, to obtain a saturated 
solution. Leave this to cool. Crystals of zinc sulfate appear. 
 Crystals of copper(II) sulfate. They are 
hydrated: they contain water molecules 
in the crystal structure. Their full formula is CuSO
4.5H2O.
3 Heat the solution to obtain a 
saturated solution. Then leave it to 
cool. Crystals of copper(II) sulfate form. They look like the crystals in the photo above. This method is fine for making salts of magnesium, aluminium, zinc, and
 iron. But you could not use it with sodium, potassium, or calcium, 
because these metals react violently with acids. 
At the other extreme, the reaction of lead with acids is too slow, and 
copper, silver and gold do not react at all. (There is more about the reactivity of metals with acids in Unit 13.2.)
Starting with an insoluble base
Copper will not react with dilute sulfuric acid. So to make copper(II) sulfate, you must start with a base such as copper(II) oxide, which is insoluble. The reaction that takes place is:
 CuO (
s) 1 H2SO4 (aq)     CuSO4 (aq) 1 H2O (l)
The method is quite like the one above:
You could also use copper(II) carbonate as the starting compound here.

--- Page 160 ---
159Acids And b A ses
Q
1 What will you start with, to make the salt zinc chloride?
2 Y ou would not make lead salts by reacting lead with acids.  
a
 Why not?
  
b
 Suggest a way to make lead nitrate. 
3 Look at step 2 at the top of page 158. The zinc was in  
excess. What does that mean? (Check the glossary?)4 What is the purpose of a titration?
5 For carrying out a titration, a bur ette and pipette are used 
rather than measuring cylinders. Why?
6 Y ou are asked to make the salt ammonium nitrate.  
Which reactants will you use? Starting with an alkali (soluble base)   
It is dangerous to add sodium to acid. So to make sodium salts, start  
with sodium hydroxide. You can make sodium chloride like this:
 NaOH (
aq) 1 HCl (aq)  NaCl (aq) 1 H2O ( l )
Both reactants are soluble, and no gas bubbles of
f. So how can you tell 
when the reaction is complete? By carrying out a titration.
In a titration, one reactant is slowly added to the other in the presence of 
an indicator. The indicator changes colour when the reaction is complete. So you know how much reactant is needed for a complete reaction.  Now you can mix the correct amounts, without the indicator.
The steps in making sodium chloride
You could use phenolphthalein as the indicator. It is pink in alkaline solution, but colourless in neutral and acid solutions. These are the steps:
indicator turns
pinkindicator
sodium hydroxide
solutionsolution is
still pinkon adding one more
drop, pink coloursuddenly disappearsacid addedfrom burette
indicator turnspinkindicator
sodium hydroxide
solutionsolution is
still pinkon adding one more
drop, pink coloursuddenly disappearsacid added
from burette
indicator turnspinkindicator
sodium hydroxide
solutionsolution isstill pinkon adding one moredrop, pink coloursuddenly disappearsacid addedfrom burette
acid added
from burette
colourless solution
(no indicator)start
ﬁnishcrystals of
sodium chloride
heatacid added
from burette
colourless solution
(no indicator)start
ﬁnishcrystals of
sodium chloride
heatacid addedfrom burette
colourless solution
(no indicator)start
ﬁnishcrystals ofsodium chloride
heat1 Put 25 cm3 of sodium hydroxide 
solution into a flask, using a 
pipette (for accuracy). Add two drops of phenolphthalein. 
4
 Find how much acid you added,
 
using the scale on the burette. This 
tells you how much acid is needed to neutralise 25 cm
3 of the alkali.2
 Add the acid from a burette, 
 
just a little at a time. Swirl the  flask carefully, to help the acid  and alkali mix.
5
 Now repeat 
without the indicator. 
(It would be an impurity.) Put 25 cm3 
of alkali in the flask. Add the correct amount of acid to neutralise it.3
 The indicator suddenly turns 
colourless. So the alkali has all been used up. The solution is now neutral. Add no more acid!
6
 Finally
, heat the solution from 
the flask to evaporate the water. White crystals of sodium chloride will be left behind.
You could use the same method for making potassium salts from potassium hydroxide, and ammonium salts from ammonia solution. The phenolphthalein says 'alkaline'.


--- Page 161 ---
11.7
Acids And b A ses
160Ba2+
Ba2+Ba2+Ba2+Cl–
Cl– Cl–Cl–Cl–Cl–
Cl–Cl–
SO42–SO42–
SO42–SO42–water
molecule
Mg2+Mg2+water
molecule
Mg2+
Mg2+water
moleculeBa2+
Ba2+Ba2+Ba2+Cl–
Cl– Cl–Cl–Cl–Cl–
Cl–Cl–
SO42–SO42–
SO42–SO42–watermolecule
Mg2+Mg2+watermolecule
Mg2+
Mg2+watermoleculeBa2+
Ba2+Ba2+Ba2+Cl–
Cl– Cl–Cl–Cl–Cl–
Cl–Cl–
SO42–SO42–
SO42–SO42–watermolecule
Mg2+Mg2+watermolecule
Mg2+
Mg2+watermoleculeMaking insoluble salts by precipitation
Not all salts are soluble
The salts we looked at so far have all been soluble. You could obtain them 
as crystals, by evaporating solutions. But not all salts are soluble. This table shows the ‘rules’ for the solubility of salts:
Soluble Insoluble
All sodium, potassium, and 
ammonium salts
All nitratesChlorides . . . except silver and lead chloride
Sulfates . . . except calcium, barium and lead sulfate
Sodium, potassium, and 
ammonium carbonates . . .but all other carbonates are insoluble
Making insoluble salts by precipitation 
Insoluble salts can be made by precipitation. 
Barium sulfate is an insoluble salt. You can make it by mixing solutions  of barium chloride and magnesium sulfate:
A solution of barium chloride, BaCl
2, contains barium ions and 
chloride ions, as shown here.A solution of magnesium sulfate, MgSO
4, contains magnesium ions 
and sulfate ions.When you mix the two solutions, the barium and sulfate ions bond together. Barium sulfate forms as a precipitate.
 The precipitation of barium sulfate.The equation for the reaction is:
 
BaCl2 (aq) 1 MgSO4 (aq)    BaSO4 (s) 1 MgCl2 (aq)
The ionic equation is:
 
Ba2 1 (aq) 1 SO42
 
2 (aq)    BaSO4 (s)
This does not show the magnesium and chloride ions, because they are spectator ions. They are present, but do not take part in the reaction. 
The steps in making barium sulfate 
1 Make up solutions of barium chloride and magnesium sulfate.
2
 Mix them. A white precipitate of barium sulfate forms at once.
3
 Filter the mixture. The precipitate is trapped in the filter paper
.
4
 Rinse the precipitate by running distilled water through it. 
5
 Then place it in a warm oven to dry
.

--- Page 162 ---
161Acids And b A ses
 The paint we use for home decoration 
contains insoluble pigments like these –  
usually made by precipitation. 
 Putting film in a camera. Most of the 
film is inside the yellow cartridge, at the top, protected from light. 
 Steady on! Most movies are shot on film, which is coated with silver halides in 
gelatine, just like camera film. Chemicals mixed with the halides provide the colour.Choosing the starting compounds   
Barium sulfate can also be made from barium nitrate and sodium sulfate, 
since both of these are soluble. As long as barium ions and sulfate ions are present, barium sulfate will precipitate.
To precipitate an insoluble salt, you must mix a solution that 
contains its positive ions with one that contains its negative ions.
Some uses of precipitation 
Precipitation has some important uses in industry. For example:
 It is used to make coloured pigments for paint.
  I t is used in some places to remove harmful substances dissolved in 
water, when cleaning up waste water.
  It is used in making film, for photography . For this, solutions of silver 
nitrate and potassium bromide are mixed with gelatine. A precipitate of tiny crystals of insoluble silver bromide forms. The mixture is then coated onto clear film, giving photographic film.
 Later
, when light strikes the film, the silver bromide will break down: 
  2AgBr (
s) 
   2Ag ( s) 1 Br2 (l)
 Y
ou can find out more about the photographic process on page 145.
Q
1 Explain what precipitation means, in your own words.
2 Name four salts you could not make by pr ecipitation.
3  Choose two starting compounds you could use to  
make these insoluble salts:
  
 a
 calcium sulfate
  
b
 magnesium carbonate
 
c
 zinc carbonate
   d
 lead chloride4 W rite a balanced equation for each reaction in 3.
5 a What is a spectator ion?
 b
 Identify the spectator ions for your r
eactions in 3.
6 W rite the ionic equations for the reactions in 3.
7 Why is pr ecipitation necessary, in making photographic 
 
film? 
!Digital cameras 
Today digital cameras are more 
popular than cameras that use film. 
In a digital camera, the light strikes  
a surface that generates a current. This is converted to an image by a little computer inside the camera.

--- Page 163 ---
11.8
Acids And b A ses
162Finding concentrations by titration 
How to find a concentration by titration
On page 159, the volume of acid needed to neutralise an alkali was found 
by adding the acid a little at a time, until the indicator showed that the reaction was complete. This method is called titration. 
You can find the concentration of an acid using the same method. 
You use a solution of alkali of known concentration (a standard solution) and titrate the acid against it. 
An example
You are asked to find the concentration of a solution of hydrochloric acid, using a 1 M solution of sodium carbonate as the standard solution.
First, titrate the acid against your standard solution.
  Measure 25 cm3 of the sodium carbonate solution into a conical flask, 
using a pipette. Add a few drops of methyl orange indicator.  
The indicator goes yellow.
 Pour the acid into a 50 cm3 burette. Record the level.
  Drip the acid slowly into the conical flask. Keep swirling the flask.  
Stop adding acid when a single drop finally turns the indicator red. Record the new level of acid in the burette.
 Calculate the volume of acid used. For example:
 Starting level:
  
  1.0 cm3
 Final level:   28.8 cm3 
 V
olume used: 
 27.8 cm3 
 So 27.8 cm3 of the acid neutralised 25 cm3 of the alkaline solution.
You can now calculate the concentration of the acid.
Step 1
 Calculate the number of moles of sodium carbonate used.
   
1000 cm3 of 1 M solution contains 1 mole so
 25 cm3 contains   25 _____ 1000    3 1 mole or 0.025 mole.
Step 2
 From the equation, find the molar ratio of acid to alkali.
 2HCl (
aq) 1 Na2CO3 (aq)    2NaCl ( aq) 1 H2O (l) 1 CO2 (g)
 2 moles
 1 mole
 The ratio is 2 moles of acid to 1 of alkali.
Step 3
 W
ork out the number of moles of acid neutralised.
 1 mole of alkali neutralises 2 moles of acid so
 0.025 mole of alkali neutralises 2 
3 0.025 moles of acid.
 0.05 moles of acid were neutralised.
Step 4
 Calculate the concentration of the acid.
 The volume of acid used was 27.8 cm3 or 0.0278 dm3.
 
concentration 5   number of moles   ________________   volume in dm3    5   0.05 _______ 0.0278   5 1.8 mol / dm3
So the concentration of the hydrochloric acid is 1.8 M.
!Remember!
 Concentration is usually given  
as moles per dm3 or mol  / dm3
 1000 cm3 5 1 dm3 
 T o convert cm3 to dm3 move 
the decimal point 3 places left. 
So 250 cm3 5 0.25 dm3 
no of moles
concentration
(mol/dm3)volume
(dm3)
 Cover ‘concentration’ with your 
finger to see how to calculate it.Use the calculation triangle

--- Page 164 ---
163Acids And b A ses
 The ethanoic acid in vinegar –  
the bottle on the left – gives salad 
dressing its tasty tang.Another sample calculation
Vinegar is mainly a solution of the weak acid ethanoic acid. 25 cm3 of 
vinegar were neutralised by 20 cm3 of 1 M sodium hydroxide solution. 
What is the concentration of ethanoic acid in the vinegar?
Step 1
 Calculate the number of moles of sodium hydroxide used.
  
 1000 cm3 of 1 M solution contains 1 mole so
  20 cm3 contains   20 _____ 1000    3 1 mole or 0.02 mole.
Step 2
 From the equation, find the molar ratio of acid to alkali.
  CH3COOH (aq) 1 NaOH (aq)    CH3COONa (aq) 1 H2O (l)
 
 1 mole
 1 mole
 
 The ratio is 1 mole of acid to 1 mole of alkali.
Step 3
 W
ork out the number of moles of acid neutralised.
 
 1 mole of alkali neutralises 1 mole of acid so
 
 
 0.02 mole of alkali neutralise 0.02 mole of acid.
Step 4
 Calculate the concentration of the acid. 
(25 cm3 5 0.025 dm3)
  concentration 
5 
  number of moles   ________________   volume in dm3    5   0.02 ______ 0.025   = 0.8 mol / dm3
  So the concentration of ethanoic acid in the vinegar is 0.8 M.
Note: ethanoic acid is only partly dissociated into ions at any given time. 
(It is a weak acid.) But as the neutralisation proceeds, it continues to dissociate until it has all reacted.
Q
1 What is a standard solution?
2 What volume of 2 M hydr ochloric acid will neutralise  
25 cm3 of 2 M sodium carbonate?3 20 cm3 of 1 M sulfuric acid were neutralised by 25 cm3 of 
ammonia solution. Calculate the concentration of the  
ammonia solution. (See the equation on page 229.)
 You can find how much alkali is needed to neutralise acid by 
doing a titration using indicator, as here … … or you could use a pH meter, to measure the pH of the 
solution. How will you know when neutralisation is complete?


--- Page 165 ---
Checkup on Chapter 11
Questions
Core curriculum
1 Rewrite the following, choosing the correct word 
from each pair in brackets.
 Acids are compounds that dissolve in water giving hydrogen ions. Sulfuric acid is an example. It can be neutralised by (acids
 /
 bases) to form salts called 
(nitrates
 /
 sulfates).
 
Many (metals
 /
 non-metals) react with acids to give 
(hydrogen
 /
 carbon dioxide). Acids react with 
(chlorides
 /
 carbonates) to give (hydrogen
 /
 carbon 
dioxide). 
 
Since they contain ions, solutions of acids are (good
 /
 poor) conductors of electricity
. They also 
affect indicators. Litmus turns (red
 /
 blue) in acids 
while phenolphthalein turns (pink
 /
 colourless). 
 
The level of acidity of an acid is shown by its (concentration
 /
 pH number). The (higher
 /
 lower) 
the number
, the more acidic the solution.
2
 A
 and B are white powders. A is insoluble in water, 
but B dissolves. Its solution has a pH of 3.  A mixture of A and B bubbles or effervesces in water, giving off a gas. A clear solution forms.
 a
  Which of the two
 powders is an acid?
 b
  The other powder is a carbonate. Which gas bubbles of
f in the reaction?
 c
  Although 
A is insoluble in water, a clear solution 
forms when the mixture of A and B is added to water. Explain why.
3
 Oxygen reacts with 
other elements to form oxides.  
Three examples are: calcium oxide, phosphorus pentoxide, and copper(II) oxide.
 a
 Which 
of these is:
  
  i
 an insoluble base?
  
 
  ii
 a soluble base?
  
  iii
 
 an acidic oxide?
 b
  When the soluble base is dissolved in water
,  
the solution changes the colour of litmus  paper. What colour change will you see? 
  c
  Name the gas given of
f when the soluble base  
is heated with ammonium chloride.
 
 d
 i
  W
rite a word equation for the reaction 
between the insoluble base and sulfuric acid.
  ii
 What is this type of reaction called? 
 e
 Name another acidic oxide.Revision checklist
Core curriculum
Make sure you can …
  n ame the common laboratory acids and alkalis,  
and give their formulae
  describe the ef fect of acids and alkalis on litmus
  explain what the pH scale is, and what pH  
numbers tell you
  describe what universal indicator is, and how its 
colour changes across the pH range
  define a base, and say that alkalis are soluble bases
   say what is formed when acids react with:
 
metals
 bases 
 carbonates
  explain what a neutralisation reaction is, and 
identify one from its equation
  say what gas is given of f when strong bases are 
heated with ammonium compounds
  say why it is important to control acidity in soil, 
and how this is done
  explain what basic oxides and acidic oxides are, 
and give examples
 choose suitable reactants for making a salt
  describe methods for preparing a solid salt,  
starting with:
 
–
 a metal or insoluble base
 
–
 an alkaline solution
  explain how and why an indicator is used, in  
a titration
Extended curriculum
Make sure you can also …
  define strong acids and weak acids, with examples
  define strong alkalis  and weak alkalis, with examples
  explain why the reaction between an acid and  
a metal is a redox reaction
  explain what happens in a neutralisation reaction,  
and give the ionic equation
  give a definition for acids and bases using the idea  
of proton transfer
  say what amphoteric oxides and neutral oxides 
are, and give examples
  choose suitable reactants for making an insoluble  
salt by precipitation
  say what spectator ions are, and identify the 
spectator ions in a precipitation reaction
  calculate the concentration of a solution of acid  
or alkali, using data from a titration
Acids And b A ses
164

--- Page 166 ---
4 The table above is about the preparation of salts. 
 i
 Copy it and fill in the missing details.
 ii
 W
rite balanced equations for the eight reactions.
5
 The drawings show the preparation of copper(II) 
ethanoate, a salt of ethanoic acid.
 powdered
copper(II) carbonate
diluteethanoicacidbubblesof gas
copper(II) ethanoatesolution
residue
ﬁltrate
unreactedcopper(II)carbonate
heatviii ivi ii
 a Which gas is given of f in stage ii?
 b
 i
 W
rite a word equation for the reaction in ii.
  
ii
 How can you tell when it is over?
 c
 Which reactant above is:
  
i
 present in excess? What is your evidence?
  
ii
 completely used up in the reaction? 
 d
  Copper(II) carbonate is used in powder form, 
rather than as lumps. Suggest a reason.
 e
 Name the residue in stage 
iv.
 f
  W
rite a list of instructions for carrying out this 
preparation in the laboratory.
 g  Suggest another copper compound 
to use instead 
of copper(II) carbonate, to make the salt.Extended curriculum
6 Magnesium sulfate (MgSO4) is the chemical name 
for Epsom salts. It can be made in the laboratory by neutralising the base magnesium oxide (MgO).
 a  Which acid should be used to make Epsom salts?
 b
 W
rite a balanced equation for the reaction.
 c
 i
  The acid is fully dissociated in water
.  
Which term describes this type of acid?
  
ii
  Which io
n causes the ‘acidity’ of the acid?
 d
 i
  What is a base?
  
ii
  W
rite an ionic equation that shows the oxide 
ion (O2 2) acting as a base.
7 a i  From the list on page 
160, write down two 
starting compounds that could be used to make the insoluble compound silver chloride.
  
ii
 What is this type of reaction called?
 b
 i
 W
rite the ionic equation for the reaction.
  
ii
 List the spectator ions for the reaction.
8
 W
ashing soda is crystals of hydrated sodium 
carbonate, Na2CO3.xH2O. 
 The value of 
x can be found by titration. 
 In the experiment, 2 g of hydrated sodium carbonate neutralised 14 cm
3 of a standard 1 M 
solution of hydrochloric acid.
 a
 What does 
hydrated mean?
 b
  W
rite a balanced equation for the reaction that  
took place during the titration.
 c
 How many moles of HCl were neutralised?
 d
  How many moles of sodium carbonate,
 
Na2CO3, were in 2 g of the hydrated salt?
 e
  What mass of sodium carbonate, Na2CO3, is  
this? (Mr : Na 5 23, C 5 12, O 5 16)
 f
  What mass of the hydrated sodium carbonate was water?
 g
  How many moles of water is this?
 h
  How many moles of water are there in 1 mole 
 
of Na2CO3.xH2O?
 i
  W
rite the full formula for washing soda.Acids And b A ses
165Method of  
preparationReactants Salt formed Other products
a
 acid 
1 alkali calcium hydroxide and nitric acid calcium nitrate water
b
 acid 
1 metal zinc and hydrochloric acid .................................. .................................
c
 acid 
1 alkali ................. and potassium hydroxide potassium sulfate water only
d
 acid 
1 carbonate .............................. and ......................... sodium chloride water and ..............
e
 acid 
1 metal .............................. and ......................... iron(II) sulfate .................................
f
 acid 
1 ................... nitric acid and sodium hydroxide ................................... .................................
g
  acid 
1 insoluble base .............................. and copper(II) oxide copper(II) sulfate .................................
h
 acid 
1 .................. .............................. and ............................. copper(II) sulfate carbon dioxide and ...............

--- Page 167 ---
1Group Group0
7  Li3
lithium9  Be4
beryllium1  H1
hydrogen
23   Na11
sodium
39   K19
potassium
85   Rb37
rubidium
133    Cs  55
caesium
223    Fr  87
francium40   Ca20
calcium
88   Sr38
strontium
137    Ba  56
barium45   Sc21
scandium
89   Y39
yurium
139    La  57
lanthanium48   Ti22
titanium
91   Zr40
zirconium
178.5      Hf  72
hafnium51   V23
vanadium
93   Nb41
niobium
181    Ta  73
tantalum52   Cr24
chromium
96   Mo42
molybdenum
184    W  74
tungsten55   Mn25
manganese
99   Tc43
technetium
186    Re  75
rhenium56   Fe26
iron
101    Ru44
ruthenium
190    Os  76
osmium59   Co27
cobalt
103     Rh  45
rhodium
192     Ir  77
iridium59   Ni28
nickel
106    Pd  46
palladium
195    Pt  78
platinum64   Cu29
copper
108    Ag  47
silver
197    Au  79
gold65   Zn30
zinc
112    Cd48
cadmium
201    Hg  80
mercury70   Ga31
gallium
115     In49
indium
204     Tl  81207     Pb  82209     Bi  83210     Po  84210     At  85222     Rn  86
thallium11   B5
boron
27    Al13
aluminium
73   Ge32
germanium
119     Sn50
tin
lead12   C6
carbon
28    Si14
silicon
75   As33
arsenic
122     Sb  51
antimony
bismuth14   N 7
nitrogen
31   P15
phosphorus
79   Se34
selenium
128     Te  52
tellurium
polonium16   O8
oxygen
32    S16
sulfur
80   Br35
bromine
127     I 53
iodine
astatine19   F  9
ﬂuorine
35.5     Cl  17 
chlorine
84   Kr36
krypton
131     Xe54
xenon
radon
140    Ce  58
cerium141    Pr  59
praseodymium144    Nd  60
neodymium147    Pm  61
promethium150    Sm  62
samarium152    Eu  63
europium157    Gd  64
gadolinium159     Tb  65
terbium162     Dy 66165     Ho  67167     Er  68169     Tm  69173     Yb  70175     Lu  71
dysprosium holmium erbium thutium ytterbium lutetium
232    Th  90
thorium231    Pa  91
protactinium238    U  92
uranium237    Np  93
neptunium244     Pu  94
plutonium243    Am  95
americium247    Cm  96
curium247     Bk  97
berkelium251     Cf  98252     Es  99257     Fm100258    Md101259     No102262    Lw103
califormium einsteinium fermium mendelevium nobelium lawrencium20   Ne10
neon4   He2
helium
40    Ar18
argon
226    Ra  88
radium227    Ac  89
actinuim24   Mg12
magnesiumThe transition elements2
34567
Lanthanides
ActinidesII I III IV VV I VII
12.1
What is the Periodic Table?
You met the Periodic Table briefly in Chapter 3. Let’s review its key points. 
  The Periodic T able is a way of classifying the elements. 
  It shows them in order of their proton number. 
Lithium has 3 protons, beryllium has 4, boron has 5, and so on.  
(The proton number is the lower number beside each symbol.)
  When arranged by proton number , the elements show periodicity: 
elements with similar properties appear at regular intervals.  The similar elements are arranged in columns.
  Look at the columns numbered 0 to VII. The elements in these form families called 
groups. Look where Group 0 is.  
  The rows are called periods. They are numbered 0 to 7.
  The heavy zig-zag line above separates metals from non-metals, with 
the non-metals to the right (except for hydrogen). 
More about the groups
  The group number is the same as the number of outer -shell electrons in 
the atoms, except for Group 0. In Group I the atoms have one outer-shell electron, in Group II they have two, and so on. 
  The outer -shell electrons are also called valency electrons. And they 
are very important: they dictate how an element behaves. 
  So all the elements in a group have similar reactions, because they have the same number of valency electrons.
  The atoms of the Group 0 elements have a very stable arrangement of 
electrons in their outer shells. This makes them unreactive.
!The small numbers
The two numbers beside a symbol 
tell you about the particles in the nucleus of its atoms: 
 nucleon number
 symbol
 pr oton number
  The nucleon number is the total  
number of particles in the nucleus (protons + neutrons)
  The proton number is the number of protons.
These numbers are for the main isotope of each element.
!Groups with special names
Group I:  the alkali metalsGroup II:  the alkaline earth metalsGroup VII:  the halogensGroup 0:  the noble gasesThe Periodic Table
166
An overview of the Periodic Table

--- Page 168 ---
Q
1 Use the Periodic T able to find the names of:
 a
 thr
ee metals in common use around you
 
 b
 two non-metals that you br
eathe in. 
2 Using only  the Periodic Table to help you, write down 
everything you can about:    a
 nitr
ogen     b
 magnesium
3 Only two gr oups in the table are completely non-metal.
 Which two?4 Name thr ee elements that are likely to react in a similar  
way to:
  
a
 
sodium
  
b
 fluorine   
5 Which is likely to be mor e reactive, oxygen or krypton? 
Why? 
6 Which element is named after:
 a
 
Europe?
  
b
 Dmitri Mendeleev?
  
c
 America?
7 Chemists consider the Periodic T able very useful. Why?
More about the periods
The period number tell you the number of electron shells in the atoms.  
So in the elements of Period 2, the atoms have two electron shells.  In Period 3 they have three, and so on.
The metals and non-metals
Look again at the table. The metals are to the left of the zig-zag line. There are far more metals than non-metals. In fact over 80% of the elements are metals. Metals and non-metals have very different properties. See Unit 3.5 for more.
Hydrogen
Find hydrogen in the table. It sits alone. That is because it has one outer electron, and forms a positive ion (H
 1) like the Group I metals – but 
unlike them it is a gas, and usually reacts like a non-metal.
The transition elements
The transition elements, in the block in the middle of the Periodic Table, are all metals. There is more about these in Unit 12.5. 
Artificial elements
Some of the elements in the Periodic Table are artificial: they have been created in the lab. Most of these are in the lowest block. They include  neptunium (Np) to lawrencium (Lr) in the bottom row. These artificial elements are radioactive, and their atoms break down very quickly. (That is why they are not found in nature.)
Patterns and trends in the Periodic Table
As you saw, the elements in a group behave in a similar way. But they also show trends. For example as you go down Group I, the elements become more reactive. Down Group VII, they become less reactive.
Across a period there is another trend: a change from metal to non-metal. 
For example in Period 2, only sodium, magnesium, and aluminium are metals. The rest are non-metals.
So if you know where an element is, in the Periodic Table, you can use the 
patterns and trends to predict how it will behave. A world-famous structur e, made 
from iron. Find iron in the Periodic Table. 
Which block is it in?

 Aluminium is used for drinks cans. 
How many valency electr
ons?
167The Periodic Table

--- Page 169 ---
12.2
What are they?
The alkali metals are in Group I in the Periodic Table:  lithium, sodium, 
potassium, rubidium, caesium and francium. Only the first three of these are safe to keep in the school lab. The rest are violently reactive.
Their physical properties
The alkali metals are not typical metals.
  Like all metals, they are good conductors of heat and electricity . 
  But they are softer than most other metals. Y ou can cut them with a knife. 
  They are ‘lighter’ than most other metals – they have low density. 
So they float on water – while reacting with it. 
  They have low melting and boiling points, compared with most metals.
The trends in their physical properties
Like any family, the alkali metals are all a little different. Look at this table:
So there is an overall increase or decrease for each property, as you go 
down the table. This kind of pattern is called a trend. 
Their chemical properties
Let’s compare the reactions of lithium, sodium, and potassium, in the lab.
1
 Reaction with water
 All three react violently with water
, giving hydrogen and a hydroxide.
 Note the trend in reactivity
. For sodium the reaction is:
  
sodium
 1
 water
  sodium hydroxide  1  hydrogen
 Sodium hydroxide is an alkali, so the indicator changes colour
. 
  The alkali metals react vigorously with water
. Hydrogen bubbles 
off, leaving solutions of their hydroxides, which are alkalis.I
 A piece of sodium, cut with a knife.
Metal This metal is silvery and … Density  in  g / cm3Melts at   / 8C
lithium, Li soft 0.53 181
sodium, Na a little softer 0.97  98
potassium, K softer still 0.86  63
rubidium, Rb even softer 1.53  39
caesium, Cs the softest 1.88  29
Experiment What you see
 lithium floats and fizzes
 sodium shoots acr oss the water
  potassium melts with the heat  
of the reaction, and the hydrogen 
catches firesoftness
increasesdensity
increasesmelting
points
decreasesoftness
increasesdensity
increasesmelting
points
decreasesoftness
increasesdensity
increasesmelting
points
decrease
trough of
water andindicatormetal
increasing
reactivity trough ofwater andindicatormetal
increasing
reactivityThe Periodic Table
168
Group I: the alkali metals

--- Page 170 ---
 Lithium, sodium, and potassium ar e 
stored under oil in the lab, to prevent 
reaction with oxygen and water.
2,1 2,8,1 2,8,8,1LiNaK2 Reaction with chlorine
  If you heat the three metals, and plunge them into gas jars of chlorine,
 
they burst into flame. They burn brightly, forming chlorides. For example: 
  
sodium 1 chlorine  sodium chloride
3
 Reaction with oxygen  
  The 
three metals also burst into flame when you heat them and plunge 
them into gas jars of oxygen. They burn fiercely to form oxides. These 
dissolve in water to give alkaline solutions.
The same trend in reactivity is shown in all three reactions. Each time, lithium is the least reactive of the three elements, and potassium the most:
Reactivity increases as you go down Group I. 
Why do they react in a similar way?
All the alkali metals react in a similar way. Why? Because they have the 
same number of valency (outer-shell) electrons:
Atoms with the same number of valency electrons react in a similar way.
Why are they so reactive?
The alkali metals are the most reactive of all the metals. 
Why? Because they need to lose only one electron, to gain a stable outer shell. 
So they have a strong drive to react with other elements and compounds, in order to give up this electron. They become ions. The compounds they form are ionic. For example sodium chloride is made up of the ions Na
 1 and Cl  2.
The alkali metals form ionic compounds, in which the metal ion has a charge of 11. The compounds are white solids. They dissolve in water to give colourless solutions.
!Why does reactivity increase  
down Group I?
In reactions, the Group I atoms lose 
their outer electron, to gain a stable outer shell. 
The more shells there are, the further 
the outer electron is from the positive nucleus – so the easier to lose.
And the easier it is to lose an 
electron, the more reactive the metal will be! 
Q
1 a What is the other name for the Gr oup I elements?
 b
 Why ar
e they called that? 
2 Which best describes the Gr oup I metals:
 a
 soft or har
d?
  
b
 r
eactive or unreactive?
3 The Gr oup I metals show a trend in melting points. 
 a
 What does that mean? 
 b
 
 Describe two other physical tr
ends for the group.
 c
  One measur
ement in the table on page 168 does not fit 
the trend. See if you can spot it.4 a  What forms when potassium r eacts with chlorine?
 b
 
 What colour is this compound?
 c 
 What will you 
see when you dissolve it in water? 
 d
 
 W
ill the solution conduct electricity? Explain.
5 Which holds its outer electr on more strongly: a lithium 
 atom, or a sodium atom? Explain why you think so.
6 Rubidium is below potassium, in Gr oup I. Predict how  
it will react with:
  
a
 water
  
b
 chlorine
 
and describe the products that form.!And the winner is …
Lithium is the lightest of all metals. 
169The Periodic Table

--- Page 171 ---
12.3
A non-metal group
Group VII is a group of non-metal elements. It includes fluorine, chlorine, 
bromine, and iodine. These are usually called the halogens. They all: 
  form coloured gases. Fluorine is a pale yellow gas and chlorine is a green gas. Bromine forms a red vapour
, and iodine a purple vapour.
  are poisonous.
  form diatomic molecules (containing two atoms). For example, Cl2.
Trends in their physical properties
As usual, the group shows trends in physical properties. Look at these:
Trends in their chemical properties
The halogens are among the most reactive elements in the Periodic Table. They react with metals to form compounds called halides. For example:
So they all react in a similar way. But note the trend in reactivity:   
Reactivity decreases as you go down Group VII. 
Why do they react in a similar way?
The halogens react in a similar way because their atoms all have 7 valency  (outer-shell) electrons. Compare the fluorine and chlorine atoms:
Atoms with the same number of valency electrons react in a similar way.Halogen At room temperature the element is … Boiling point   / ° C
fluorine, F2
chlorine, Cl2
bromine, Br2
iodine, I2a yellow gas
a green gasa red liquida black solid2188 
 
235
 
    59
 
   
184colour gets 
deeperdensity 
increasesboiling points 
increase
Halogen Reaction with iron wool The product Its appearance
fluorine 
chlorine bromine iodineIron wool bursts into flame as fluorine  
passes over it – without any heating! 
Hot iron wool glows brightly when  
chlorine passes over it.
Hot iron wool glows, but less brightly,  
when bromine vapour passes over it.
Hot iron wool shows a faint red glow  
when iodine vapour passes over it.iron(III) fluoride, FeF
3 
iron(III) chloride, FeCl3 
iron(III) bromide, FeBr3 
iron(III) iodide, FeI3pale green solid 
yellow solid red-brown solid black solidVII
2,7
2,8,7F Clreactivity 
decreases
 Iodine is a disinfectant. His skin is 
being wiped with a solution of iodine in 
ethanol, befor
e he gives blood.The Periodic Table
170
Group VII: the halogens

--- Page 172 ---
Why are they so reactive?
The halogen atoms need just one more electron to reach a stable outer shell 
of 8 electrons. So they have a strong drive to react with other elements or compounds, to gain this electron. That is why they are so reactive.
When halogen atoms react with metal atoms they accept electrons, 
forming halide ions. So the products are ionic. For example the reaction between iron and chlorine gives iron(III) chloride, made up of Fe
3 1 and 
Cl
 2 ions.
But with non-metal atoms such as hydrogen and carbon, they share electrons, forming molecules with covalent bonds. For example hydrogen and chlorine atoms share electrons, to form molecules of hydrogen chloride, HCl.
How the halogens react with halides
1  When chlorine water (a solution of chlorine) is added to a colourless 
solution of potassium bromide, the solution turns orange, as shown in the photo. This reaction is taking place:
 
Cl2 (aq)  1  2KBr ( aq)   2KCl ( aq)  1  Br2 (aq) 
  
 colourless
    orange
 Bromine has been pushed out of its compound, or 
displaced. 
2
 And
 when chlorine water is added to a colourless solution of potassium 
 iodide, the solution turns red-brown, because of this reaction:
 Cl2 (aq)  1  2KI ( aq)   2KCl ( aq)  1  I2 (aq) 
  
 colourless
    red-brown
 This time iodine has been displaced.
But what happens if you use bromine or iodine instead of chlorine? This table gives the results:
Y
ou know already that chlorine is more reactive than bromine, and bromine is 
more reactive than iodine. So now you can see that:
A halogen will displace a less reactive halogen from a solution of its halide.If the solution contains … when you add chlorine … when you add bromine … when you add iodine …
chloride ions (Cl
 2)  there is no change there is no change
bromide ions (Br
 2) bromine is displaced  there is no change
iodide ions (I
 2) iodine is displaced iodine is displaced  
!Why does reactivity decrease  
down Group VII?
Halogen atoms react to gain or share 
an electron. The positive nucleus of the atom attracts the extra electron.
The more shells there are, the further 
the outer shell is from the nucleus.  So attracting an electron becomes more difficult. So reactivity falls.
 Chlorine displacing br omine from 
aqueous potassium bromide.
Q
1 What do the halogens look like? Describe them.
2 a Describe the tr end in reactivity in Group VII.
 b
 Is this tr
end the same as for Group I? (Check back!) 
3 a  Describe any similarities you notice in the products that 
form when the halogens react with iron wool.
 b
 Which type of bonding do they have?
4 What makes the halogens so r eactive?5 a  W rite a word equation for the reaction of bromine with 
potassium iodide. What do you expect to see?
 b
 Now explain 
why the reaction in a occurs.
6 The fi fth element in Group VII is called astatine. It is a very 
rare element. Do you expect it to be:
 a
 a gas, a liquid, or a solid? Give your r
eason.
 b
 colour
ed or colourless?
   c
 harmful or harmless?
171The Periodic Table

--- Page 173 ---
12.4
Noble gas Its atoms A balloon full of this gas … Boiling point / °  C
helium
neonargonkryptonxenonrises quickly into the airrises slowlyfalls slowlyfalls quicklyfalls very quickly2
269 
2246218621522107the atoms 
increase in size 
and massthe density of  
the gases 
increasesthe boiling  
points  
increase0
!Noble gas % in air
helium tiny tracesargon just under 1
 %
neon 0.002
 %
krypton 0.0001
 %
xenon less than 0.0001
 %
Helium
 is the second most abundant 
element in the universe, after 
hydrogen. But it is so light that it  escapes from our atmosphere. 
!Where we get them
We obtain helium from natural gas, in which it is an impurity.  We get the other noble gases from the air, in the fractional distillation  of liquid air (page 212).
He4
2Ne2010 Ar4018 Kr8436 Xe131
54
He42 Ne2010 Ar4018 Kr8436 Xe131
54
He42 Ne2010 Ar4018 Kr8436 Xe131
54
He42 Ne2010 Ar4018 Kr8436 Xe131
54
He42 Ne2010 Ar4018 Kr8436 Xe131
54The Periodic Table
172
Group 0: the noble gases
The noble gases
This group of non-metals contains the elements helium, neon, argon, 
krypton and xenon. These elements are all:
  non-metals
  colourless gases, which occur naturally in air
  monatomic  – they exist as single atoms
  unreactive. This is their most striking property . They do not normally 
react with anything. That is why they are called noble.
Why are they unreactive?
As you have seen, atoms react in order to gain a stable outer shell of electrons. But the atoms of the noble gases already have a stable outer shell – with 8 electrons, except for helium which has 2 (since it has only one shell):
So the atoms have no need to react in order to gain or lose electrons.  
The noble gases are unreactive, and monatomic, because their atoms already have a stable outer electron shell.
Trends in their physical properties
Like all groups, the Group 0 elements do show trends. Look at this table.
The gases grow denser (or ‘heavier’) down the group, because the mass of 
the atoms increases. The increase in boiling points is a sign of increasing attraction between atoms. It gets harder to separate them to form a gas. 
Compare these physical trends with those for the Group VII non-metals on  
page 170. What do you notice?a helium atom a neon atom an argon atomNe He Ar Ne He Ar Ne He Ar

--- Page 174 ---
 Colourful signs in T okyo, thanks to neon.   Cool blue headlamps, thanks to  xenon.
 Ther e is an easy way to blow up 
balloons: buy a canister of helium.Uses of the noble gases
The noble gases are unreactive or inert, which makes them safe to use. 
They also glow when a current is passed through them at low pressure. These properties lead to many uses. 
  Helium is used to fill balloons and airships, because it is much lighter than air – and will not catch fire. 
  Argon is used to provide an inert atmosphere. For example it is used: 
 –
  as a filler in tungsten light bulbs. (If air were used, the oxygen in it would make the tungsten filament burn away
.) 
 –
  to protect metals that are being welded. It won’
t react with the hot 
metals (unlike the oxygen in air). 
  Neon is used in advertising signs. It glows red, but the colour can be changed by mixing it with other gases.
  Krypton is used in lasers – for example for eye surgery – and in car headlamps.
  Xenon gives a light like bright daylight, but with a blue tinge. It is used in lighthouse lamps, lights for hospital operating rooms, and car headlamps.
Q
1 Why do the members of Gr oup 0 have similar  
properties?
2 Explain why the noble gases ar e unreactive.
3 a  What ar e the trends in density and boiling point for  
the noble gases?
 b
 Ar
e these trends the same as for:  
  
i
 Gr
oup I?
   
ii
 Gr
oup VII?
  
(Check back!) 4 The noble gases ar e widely used. Explain why, and give one 
use for each. 
5 The sixth element in Gr oup 0 is radon (Rn). Would you 
expect it to be:
 a
 a gas, a liquid, or a solid, at r
oom temperature?
 b
 heavier
, or lighter, than xenon?
 c
 chemically r
eactive?
 
173The Periodic Table

--- Page 175 ---
12.5
What are they?
The transition elements are the block of 30 elements in the middle of the 
Periodic Table. They are all metals, and include most of the metals we use every day – such as iron, tin, copper, and silver.
Their physical properties
Here are three of the transition elements:
Here is some data for them, with sodium for comparison:
The transition elements share these physical properties:
  hard, tough and strong . They are not soft like the Group I metals.
  high melting points . Look at the values in the table. But mercury is an 
exception. It is a liquid at room temperature. (It melts at 239
 °
 C.)
  malleable  (can be hammered into different shapes) and ductile (can 
be drawn out into wires).
  good conductors of heat and electricity . Of all the metals, silver is 
the best conductor of electricity, and copper is next. 
  high density . They are heavy. 1 cm3 cube of iron weighs 7.9 grams – 
over 8 times more than 1 cm3 cube of sodium.
Their chemical properties
1  They are much less reactive than the Group I metals.   
For example copper and nickel do not react with water, or catch fire in 
air – unlike sodium. In general, the transition elements do not corrode readily in the atmosphere. But iron is an exception – it rusts easily.  We spend a fortune every year on rust prevention. 
2
  They show no clear trend in reactivity
, unlike the Group I metals.  
But those next to each other in the Periodic Table do tend to be similar.Iron: the most widely used metal; grey with a metallic lustre (shine).Copper: reddish with a metallic lustre.Nickel: silvery with a metallic lustre.The transition
elements
 Because they ar e coloured, compounds 
of the transition elements are used in 
pottery glazes. 
Element Symbol Density in g  / cm3Melting point  / ° C
ir
on Fe 7.9 1535
copper Cu 8.9 1083
nickel  Ni 8.9 1455
sodium Na 0.97 98
!Some transition elements
iron copper
nickel 
 zinc
silver  
 gold 
platinum 
 mer
cury 
chromium 
 cadmiumThe Periodic Table
174
The transition elements

--- Page 176 ---
3  Most transition elements form coloured compounds. In contrast, 
the Group I metals form white compounds.
4
 Most can form ions with dif
ferent charges. Compare these:
 So we say the transition 
elements show variable valency.
5
  They can form more than one compound with another element.
 
This is because of their variable valency. For example:
 copper(I) oxide, Cu2O copper(II) oxide, CuO
 iron(II) oxide, FeO
 iron(III) oxide, Fe2O3
  The Roman numeral in brackets tells you how many electrons the 
metal atom has lost. This number is called its oxidation state.
6
  Most transition 
elements can form complex ions. For example, if 
you add ammonia to a solution containing copper(II) ions, a pale blue 
precipitate of copper(II) hydroxide forms. It dissolves again if you add more ammonia, giving a deep blue solution. 
  It dissolves because each copper ion attracts four ammonia molecules and two water molecules, forming a large soluble 
complex ion. This 
ion gives the solution its deep blue colour. 
Uses of the transition elements
  The hard, strong transition elements are used in structures such as 
bridges, buildings, and cars. Iron is the most widely used – usually in the form of alloys called steels. (In alloys, small amounts of other substances are mixed with a metal, to improve its properties.) 
  Many transition  elements are used in making alloys. For example, 
chromium and nickel are mixed with iron to make stainless steel. 
  T ransition elements are used as conductors of heat and electricity. For 
example, steel is used for radiators, and copper for electric wiring.
  Many transition elements and their compounds acts as catalysts. 
Catalysts speed up reactions, while remaining unchanged themselves. For example, iron is used as a catalyst in making ammonia (page 127).Metal Charge on ions Examples
Group I metals always 11 sodium: Na
 1
Group II metals always 21 magnesium: Mg2 1 
Group III metals always 31 aluminium: Al3 1
Transition elements variable copper: Cu  1, Cu2 1
iron: Fe2 1, Fe3 1
!Salts of transition elements
  The oxides and hydroxides of all 
metals are bases; they react with acids to form salts. 
  So you can make salts of the transition elements by starting with their oxides or hydr
oxides, 
and reacting these with acids.
!Testing for copper ions
The reaction in point 6 is used in the test for copper(II) ions (page 286.)
The formula of the complex ion is 
[Cu(H
2O)2(NH3)4] 2 1.
 Ir on rods give the building strength.
Q
1 Name five transition elements.
2 Which best describes the transition elements, overall:
 a
 
 soft or har
d?
   
b
  high density or low density?
 c
 
 high melting point or low melting point?
 d
 
 r
eactive or unreactive, with water?3 What is unusual about mer cury?
4 Most paints contain compounds of transition elements.  
Why do you think this is?
5 Suggest r easons why copper is used in hot water pipes,  
while iron is not. 
175The Periodic Table

--- Page 177 ---
12.6The Periodic Table
176
Across the Periodic Table
Trends across Period 3
As you saw, there are trends within groups in the Periodic Table. There are 
also trends across a period. Look at this table for Period 3:
Group I II III IV V VI VII 0
Element sodium magnesium aluminium silicon phosphorus sulfur chlorine argon
Valency electrons 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8
Element is a . . . metal metal metal metalloid non-metal non-metal non-metal non-metal
Reactivity high  low  high unreactive
Melting point
 
/
 
°
 
C) 98 649 660 1410 590 119 –101 –189
Boiling point
 
/
 
°
 
C) 883 1107 2467 2355 (ignites) 445 –35 –186
Oxide is . . . basic amphoteric           acidic –
Typical compound NaCl MgCl2 AlCl3 SiCl4 PH3 H2S HCl –
Valency shown in 
that compound1 2 3 4 3 2 1 –3
Notice these trends across the period:
1
  The number of valency (outer
-shell) electrons increases by 1 each time. 
It is the same as the group number, for Groups I to VII. 
2
  The elements go from metal to non-metal. Silicon is in between. It is like a metal in some ways and a non-metal in others. It is called a metalloid
.
3
  Melting and boiling points rise to the middle of the period, then fall to
 very low values on the right. (Only chlorine and argon are gases at 
room temperature.) 
4
  The oxides of the metals are 
basic – they react with acids to form salts. 
Those of the non-metals are acidic – they react with alkalis to form salts. But aluminium oxide is in between: it reacts with both acids and alkalis to form salts. So it is called an amphoteric oxide. (See page 157 for more.)
The elements in Period 2 show similar trends.
The change from metal to non-metal
The change from metal to non-metal is not clear-cut. Silicon is called a metalloid because it is like metal in some ways, and a non-metal in others. 
In fact there are metalloids in all the periods of the table. They lie along 
the zig-zag line that separates metals from non-metals. Look on the right.II III IV VVI VIIGroup 0
metalsnon-
metals
B
Si
As
Te
PoGe
Sbboron
silicon
germanium
antimonyarsenic
poloniumtelluriummetalloidsI

--- Page 178 ---
Q
1 a  Describe how the number of valency electr ons changes  
with gr
oup number, across the Periodic Table.
 b
  Describe the change in character
 from metal to non-
metal, across Period 3.
2 How does the r eactivity of the metals change as you move 
across a period? Why?
3 What does valency of an element mean? Give two examples.
4 What is a metalloid?  Give three examples.
5 What is a semi-conductor? Name one.6 a  A challenge! Make a table like the one opposite, but for 
Period
 2. For each element the table should show: 
  
i
 the gr
oup number  
  
ii
 the name of the element  
  
iii
 the number of valency electr
ons it has  
  
iv
 a typical compound 
  
v
 the valency shown in that compound.
 b
  Now try to pr
edict melting and boiling points for the 
elements in the period. (The earlier units may help!)
177The Periodic Table
 Silicon occurs naturally in sand as 
silica (silicon dioxide). T
o extract it the 
silica is heated with carbon (coke). Metals conduct electricity. Metalloids can too, under certain conditions. 
So they are called semi-conductors. This leads to their use in computer chips and PV cells for solar power. Silicon is used the most.
Valency
Look at the last two rows in the table. One shows a typical compound of each element. The other shows the valency of the element in that compound. 
The valency of an element is the number of electrons its atoms lose, 
gain or share, to form a compound. 
Sodium always loses 1 electron to form a compound. So it has a valency of 
1. Chlorine shares or gains 1, so it also has a valency of 1. Valency rises to 4 in the middle of the period, then falls again. It is zero for the noble gases.
Note that valency is not the same as the number of valency electrons. But:
  the valency does match the number of valency electrons, up to Group IV
  the valency matches the charge on the ion, where an element forms ions.
What about reactivity?
As you know, metal atoms lose their outer electrons when they react, 
while non-metal atoms accept or share electrons.
Reactivity across Period 3 changes roughly like this:
.
Note that:
  reactivity decreases across the metals. Aluminium is a lot less reactive 
than sodium, for example. Why? Because the more electrons a metal atom 
needs to lose, the more difficult it is. (The electrons must have 
enough energy to overcome the pull of the nucleus.)
  reactivity increases across the non-metals (apart from Group 0). So 
chlorine is more reactive than sulfur. Why? Because the fewer electrons a non-metal atom needs to gain, the easier it is to attract them. Silicon is the main element used in 
solar cells, to generate electricity fr
om 
sunlight. It has to be 99.9999% pure!GroupReactivity
I II III IVVV I VII 0

--- Page 179 ---
178The Periodic Table
How the Periodic Table developed
 250 years ago, nobody knew of 
aluminium. T
oday, planes are about 
80% aluminium by mass.  

 Newlands knew of all these, in 1865. 
How many of them can you name?
 
Find Di (for didymium). This 'element' 
was later found to be a mixture. Life before the Periodic Table
Imagine you find a box of jigsaw pieces. You really want to build that 
jigsaw. But the lid has only scraps of the picture. Many of the pieces are missing. And the image on some pieces is not complete. How frustrating! 
That’s how chemists felt, about 150 years ago. They had found more and 
more new elements. For example 24 metals, including lithium, sodium, potassium, calcium, and magnesium, were discovered between 1800 and 1845. They could tell that these fitted a pattern of some kind. They could see fragments of the pattern – but could not work out what the overall pattern was. 
And then the Periodic Table was published in 1869, and everything began 
to make sense.
A really clever summary
The Periodic Table is the summary of chemistry. It names the elements that make up our world. It shows the families they belong to, and how these relate to each other. It even tells you about the numbers of protons, electrons, and electron shells in their atoms.
Today we take the Periodic Table for granted. But it took hundreds of 
years, and hard work by hundreds of chemists, to develop. There were some good tries along the way, like the ‘Law of Octaves’.
The Law of Octaves
By 1863, 56 elements were known. John Newlands, an English chemist, noted that there were many pairs of similar elements. In each pair, the atomic weights (or relative atomic masses) differed by a multiple of 8. So he produced a table with the elements in order of increasing atomic weight, and put forward the Law of Octaves: an element behaves like the eighth one following it in the table.
This was the first table to show a repeating or periodic pattern of 
properties. But it had many inconsistencies. For example it had copper and sodium in the same group – even though they behave very differently.  So it was rejected by other chemists. 
 Lithium was discover ed in 1817.  
Lithium batteries are used in pacemakers, 
to keep the heartbeat steady.
Newland's Table of Octaves, presented to the Chemical Society in 
London in 1865
H Li Be B C N O
F Na Mg Al Si P S
Cl K Ca Cr Ti Mn Fe
Co, Ni Cu Zn Y In As Se
Br Rb Sr Ce, La Zr Di, Mo Ro, Ru
Pd Ag Cd U Sn Sb T e
I Cs Ba, V Ta W Nb Au
Pt, Ir Tl Pb Th Hg Bi Os
!Examples of octaves
element  atomic weight
potassium
 
39
sodium
  2
 23
 
 16
 or 2 
3 8
calcium
 
40
magnesium
 2
 24
 
 16
 or 2 
3 8
Now we use relative atomic mass 
instead of atomic weight.

--- Page 180 ---
179The Periodic Table
 New elements ar e still being added to the Periodic Table.  
This is the team that created the artificial element 112, which was 
officially named copernicium (Cn) in 2010.
The Periodic Table arrives
Dmitri Ivanovich Mendeleev was born in Russia in 1834, the youngest of 
at least 14 children. By the age of 32, he was a Professor of Chemistry.
Mendeleev had gathered a huge amount of data about the elements. 
He wanted to find a pattern that made sense of it, to help his students. So he made a card for each of the known elements (by then 63). He played around with the cards on a table, first putting the elements in order of atomic weight, and then into groups with similar behaviour. The result was the Periodic Table. It was published in 1869. 
Mendeleev took a big risk: he left gaps for elements not yet discovered.  
He even named three: eka-aluminium, eka-boron, and eka-silicon, and predicted their properties. And soon three new elements were found, that matched his predictions – gallium, scandium and germanium. This helped to convince other chemists, and his table was accepted.
Atomic structure and the Periodic Table
Mendeleev had put the elements in order of atomic weight. But he was puzzled, because he then had to swop some to get them into the right groups. For example potassium (A
r 5 39) is lighter than argon (Ar 5 40),  
so should come before argon. But a reactive metal like potassium clearly belongs to Group I, not Group 0. So he switched those two around. 
I
n 1911 the proton was discovered. It soon became clear that the proton 
number was the key factor in deciding an element’s position in the table. 
So Mendeleev was right to swop those elements. But it was still not clear why the groups were so different. Then scientists discovered that:
 the number of electrons equals the number of protons, in an atom
 the electrons are arranged in shells
 the outer -shell electrons dictate reactions. So elements with the same 
 number of outer
-shell electrons react in the same way.
By 1932, 63 years after it appeared, Mendeleev's table finally made sense. Today’s Periodic Table contains many more elements. But his table, nearly 150 years old, is still the blueprint for it.  Dmitri Mendeleev (1834  –  1907). Element 101 in the 
Periodic T
able – the artificial element Mendelevium (Md) – 
 is named after him. So is a crater on the moon.
 Mendeleev knew of aluminium, 
titanium, and molybdenum, which ar
e 
all used in today's racing bikes. 
 Mendeleev would r ecognise all the 
elements in these health tablets too. 

--- Page 181 ---
Questions
Core curriculum
1  This extract from the Periodic T able shows the 
symbols for the first 20 elements.
 MgBe Li
Na
KCaH
BC NO FNeHe
AISiPS ArCI
 Look at the row from lithium (Li) to neon (Ne).
 a
  What is this row of the Periodic T
able called?
 b
 Which element in it is the least reactive? Why?
 
Look at the column of elements from lithium (Li) 
to potassium (K).
 c
 What is this column of the table called?
 d
  Of the three elements shown in this column, which one is the most reactive?
2
 Rubidium is an alkali metal. It lies below potassium in Group I. Here is data for Group I:
 Element Proton 
numberMelting 
point
 /
 °
 CBoiling  
point
 /
 °
 CChemical r 
eactivity
lithium 3 180 1330 quite 
reactive
sodium 11 98 890 reactive
potassium 19 64 760 very 
reactive 
rubidium 37 ? ? ?
caesium 55 29 690 violently 
reactive
 a  Describe the trends in melting point, boiling 
point, and reactivity
, as you go down the group.
 b
  Now predict the missing
 data for rubidium.
 c
 In a rubidium atom:
  
i
 how many electron shells are there?
  
ii
 how many electrons are there?
  
iii
 how many valency electrons are there?
3
 Identify these non-metal elements:
 a
 a colourless gas, used in balloons and airships
 b
 a poisonous green gas
 c
  a colourless gas that glows with a red light in advertising signs
 d
 a red liquid
 e
  a yellow gas which is so reactive that it is not allowed in school labs
 f
  a black solid that forms a purple vapour when you heat it gently
.Revision checklist
Core curriculum
Make sure you can …
 state the link between the Periodic T able and 
proton number
 point out where in the Periodic T able these are: 
 Group I
 Group VII
 Group 0
 
hydrogen
 the transition 
elements
 define valency electrons
 state the link between : 
–  group number and the number of valency 
 
electrons
 –  
period number and the number of electron shells
 describe the change from metal to non-metal, 
across a period
 say why elements in a group react in a similar way
 give the other name for Group I, and name at least  
three elements in this group 
 describe the trends in softness, melting point, density
, and reactivity, for the Group I elements
 give at least two typical reactions for Group I 
elements, and 
describe the products
 explain why the Group I elements are so reactive
 give the other name for Group VII 
 name at least four Group VII elements and say 
what they look like at room temperature 
 describe the trend in reactivity for Group VII 
 explain why the Group VII elements are so reactive
 describe how halogens react with solutions of  other 
halides, and explain the pattern
 give the other name for Group 0, and name five elements in this group 
 explain why the Group 0 elements are unreactive
 give one use for each Group 0 element you name 
 give three physical properties  and three chemical 
properties of the transition elements
 explain why compounds of transition elements  
often have Roman numerals in their names
 give some uses of transition elements, including as catalysts
Extended curriculum
Make sure you can also …
 give more detail about the trends across a period, including the change from metal to non-metal
Checkup on Chapter 12The Periodic Table
180


--- Page 182 ---
4 This diagram shows some of the elements in  
Group VII of the Periodic Table.
 F
Cl
Br
IGroup0
II I III IV VV IV II
 a What are the elements in this group called?
 b
  Chlorine reacts explosively with hydrogen.
 The 
word equation for the reaction is:
   
hydrogen 1 chlorine  hydrogen chloride
 
 The reaction requires sunlight, but not heat.
  
i
  How would you expect fluorine to react with 
hydrogen?
  
ii
 W
rite the word equation for the reaction.
 c
 i
 How might bromine react with hydrogen?
  
ii
 W
rite the word equation for that reaction.
5
 The Periodic T
able is the result of hard work by 
many scientists, in many countries, over hundreds of years. They helped to develop it by discovering, and investigating, new elements.
 The Russian chemist Mendeleev was the first person to produce a table like the one we use today
. 
He put all the elements he knew of into his table. But he realized that gaps should be left for elements not yet discovered. He even predicted the properties of some of these. 
 Mendeleev published his Periodic T
able in 1869. 
The extract on the right below shows Groups I and VII from his table. Use the modern Periodic Table (page 314) to help you answer these questions.
 a
 What does Period 2 mean?
 b
 i
 
  How does Group I in the modern Periodic
 
Table differ from Group I in Mendeleev’s table?
  
ii 
  The arrangement in the modern table is more appropriate for Group I. Explain why
.
  
iii 
  What do we call the Group I elements today?
 c
 
 i 
 What do we call the Group VII elements?
  
ii 
  The element with the symbol Mn is out of place in Group VII. Why?
  
iii
 Where is the element Mn in today's table?
 d
 
  Mendeleev left gaps in several places in his table. Why did he do this?
 e
 
  There was no group to the right of Group VII, 
 
in Mendeleev’s table. Suggest a reason for this omission.Extended curriculum
6 This question is about elements from these families:  
alkali metals, alkaline earth metals (Group II), transition elements, halogens, noble gases.
 A
  is a soft, silvery metal that reacts violently with water
.
 B
  is a gas at room temperature. It reacts violently with other elements, without heating.
 C
 is an unreactive gas that sinks in air
.
 D
  is a hard solid at room temperature, and forms coloured compounds.
 E
  conducts electricity
, and reacts slowly with 
water. Its atoms each give up two electrons.
 F
  is a reactive liquid
; it does not conduct 
electricity; it shows a valency of 1 in its compounds.
 G
  is a hard solid that conducts electricity
, can be 
beaten into shape, and rusts easily.
 a
  For each element above, say which of the listed families it belongs to. 
 b
 i
  Comment on the position of elements 
A, B, 
and C within their families.
  
ii
  Describe the valence (outer) shell of electrons
 
for each of the elements A, B, and C.
 c
  Explain why the arrangement of electrons in their atoms makes some elements very reactive, and others unreactive.
 d
 Name elements that fit descriptions 
A to G.
 e
 Which of 
A to G may be useful as catalysts?
7
 The elements of Group 0 are called the noble gases. They are all monatomic gases.
 
a
 Name four of the noble gases.
 b
 i
 What is meant by 
monatomic?
  
ii
  Explain 
why the noble gases, unlike all other               
gaseous elements, are monatomic. 
 When elements react, they become 
like noble gases.
 c
 i
 Explain what the above statement means.
  
ii
  What can you conclude about the reactivity of Group VII 
ions?
An extract from Mendeleev’s Periodic Table
Group I Group VII
Period 1 H
Period 2 Li F
Period 3 Na Cl
Period 4 K  
 CuMn
  
 Br
Period 5 Rb
  
 Ag 
 IThe Periodic T
able
181

--- Page 183 ---
13.1
So far …
You have met quite a lot of information about metals already. We review it 
in this unit, before going on to look more closely at their reactivity.
Metals and the Periodic Table
The metals lie to the left of the zig-zag line in the Periodic Table. There are far more metals than non-metals. In fact over 80% of the elements are metals. Here is a reminder of some of them:
The physical properties of metals
Metals usually have these physical properties.
1
  They are 
strong. If you press on them, or drop them, or try to tear 
them, they won’t break – and it is hard to cut them.
2
  They are 
malleable. They can be hammered into shape without 
breaking.
3
 They are 
ductile: they can be drawn out into wires.
4
 They are 
sonorous: they make a ringing noise when you strike them.
5
 They are shiny when polished.
6
 They are good conductors of electricity and heat.
7
  They have high melting and boiling points. (They are all solid at room 
temperature, except mercury
.)
8
  They 
have high density – they feel ‘heavy’. (Look at the blue panel.)
The chemical properties of metals
1  They react with oxygen to form oxides. For example, magnesium 
burns in air to form magnesium oxide. 
2
 Metal oxides are 
bases: they neutralise acids, forming salts and water.
3
  Metals form positive ions
 when they react. For example, magnesium 
forms magnesium ions (Mg2 1) when it reacts with oxygen.
4
  For the metals in the numbered groups, the 
charge on the ion is the 
same as the group number. But the transition elements have variable valency: they can form ions with different charges. For example Cu
 1 
and Cu2 1.Group I – the alkali  metals (lithium,  sodium, potassium …)
Group II – the alkaline earth 
metals (beryllium, magnesium, calcium …)Group III has aluminium, the most abundant metal in the Earth’s crust, in this position …
the transition elements – all are metals, and they include most of the metals in everyday use, like iron, copper, tin, zinc, lead, silver, gold …0 Group
II III IVVV IVII
metalstransition elements non-
metalsI
!What is density?
It tells you ‘how heavy'.
density 5   mass (in grams)  ______________   
volume (in cm3)  
Compar
e these:
            1 cm3 of iron, mass 7.86 g 
             density 7.86 g
 /
 cm3     
 
            1 cm3 of lead, mass 11.34 g  
            density 11.34 g
 /
 cm3 
 Dr opping anchor … helped by the  
density of the iron.The behaviour of me Tals
182
Metals: a review

--- Page 184 ---
 W e are over 96% non-metal (mainly oxygen, carbon, 
nitrogen, hydrogen) but we also contain metals: calcium, 
potassium, sodium, magnesium, copper, zinc, iron and more …
Iron is malleable and strong.  
Good for gates like these! But it rusts easily in damp air. And unlike most other metals, it is magnetic. It melts at 1530
 °C
.Sodium is so soft that you can cut it with a knife. It floats on water – and reacts immediately with it, forming a solution. So no good for gates. It melts at only 98
 °C.Gold is unreactive. It is malleable, ductile, and looks attractive. 
It is 
also quite rare. So it is used for jewellery and precious objects.  It melts at 1064
 °C. T rucks at a copper mine in the USA. Metals are big business. 
World trade in metals is worth over 2000 billion US dollars a 
year, and the metals industry employs around 70 million people. 
All metals are different!
The properties on the opposite page are typical of metals.  
But all metals are different. They do not share all of those properties. For example, all do conduct electricity, and their oxides act as bases.  But compare these:
So of those three metals, sodium is clearly the most reactive, and gold the 
least. In the next two units we will look at reactions you can do in the lab, to compare the reactivities of metals.
Q
1 Not all metals shar e the typical metal properties. See if you
 can name a metal (not shown in the photos) that is 
not:
 a
 har
d and strong
 b
 malleable at r
oom temperature
2 10 cm3 of aluminium weighs 28 g. 
 10 cm3 of tin weighs 74 g.
 a
 Which is mor
e dense, aluminium or tin?
 b
 How many times mor
e dense is it than the other metal? 3 Suggest r easons for this use of a metal:
 a
 silver for jewellery
 b
 copper for electrical 
wiring
4 For some uses, a highly sonorous metal is needed. 
 See if you can give 
two examples.
5 T ry to think of two reasons why:
 a
 mer
cury is used in thermometers
 b
 aluminium is used for soft-drinks cans.
183The behaviour of me Tals

--- Page 185 ---
13.2The behaviour of me Tals
184
Comparing metals for reactivity
What does reactive mean?
A reactive element has a strong drive to become a compound, so that its 
atoms gain stable outer shells. So the metal reacts readily with other elements and compounds. Compare the reactions below.
1 The r eaction of metals with water
sodium
watercalciumwet mineral wool
magnesium
ribbonburning
hydrogen
water
heatsodium
watercalciumwet mineral wool
magnesium
ribbonburning
hydrogen
water
heatsodium
watercalciumwet mineral wool
magnesium
ribbonburning
hydrogen
water
heat
Sodium reacts violently with cold 
water, whizzing over the surface. Hydrogen gas and a clear solution of sodium hydroxide are formed.The reaction between calcium and cold water is slower. Hydrogen bubbles off, and a cloudy solution of calcium hydroxide forms.Magnesium reacts very slowly with cold water, but vigorously on heating in steam: it glows brightly. Hydrogen and solid magnesium oxide form.
You can tell from their behaviour that sodium is the most reactive of the three metals, and magnesium the least. 
Compare the equations for the three reactions, below. 
What pattern do you notice?
 2Na (
s)
 1
 2H2O (l)  2NaOH ( aq)  1  H2 (g)
 Ca (
s)
 1
 2H2O (l)  Ca(OH)2 (aq)  1  H2 (g)
 Mg (
s)
 1
 H2O (g)   MgO ( s)  1  H2 (g)
Now compare the reactions of those metals with the others in this table:
Note the order of reactivity, based on the reaction with water.  
And note that only the first three metals in the list produce hydroxides. The others produce insoluble oxides, if they react at all.Metal Reaction Order of  
reactivityProducts
potassium very violent with cold water; catches fire most reactive hydrogen and a solution of potassium hydroxide, 
KOH
sodium violent with cold water hydrogen and a solution of sodium hydroxide, 
NaOH
calcium less violent with cold water
 hydr
ogen and calcium hydroxide, Ca(OH)2,  
which is only slightly soluble
magnesium very slow with cold water, but vigorous  
with steamhydrogen and solid magnesium oxide, MgO
zinc quite slow with steam hydrogen and solid zinc oxide, ZnO
iron slow with steam hydrogen and solid iron oxide, Fe3O4
copper
silvergoldno reaction
least reactive

--- Page 186 ---
!Remember OIL RIG! 
Oxidation I s Loss of electrons 
Reduction I s Gain of electrons. Magnesium displacing hydr ogen 
from hydrochloric acid.
185The behaviour of me Tals
Metal Reaction with hydrochloric acid Order of  
reactivityProducts
magnesium vigorous most reactive hydrogen and a solution of magnesium chloride, 
MgCl2
zinc quite slow hydrogen and a solution of zinc chloride, ZnCl2
iron slow hydrogen and a solution of iron(II) chloride, FeCl2
lead slow, and only if the acid is concentrated hydrogen and a solution of lead(II) chloride, PbCl2
copper 
silvergoldno reaction, even with concentrated acid
least reactive2 The r eaction of metals with hydrochloric acid
It is not safe to add sodium or potassium to acid in the lab, because the 
reactions are explosively fast. But other metals can be tested safely. Compare these reactions with hydrochloric acid:
The equation for the reaction with magnesium this time is:
 Mg (
s)
 1
 2HCl (
aq)
  MgCl2 (aq)  1  H2 (g)
Now compare the order of the metals in the two tables, and the equations 
for the reactions. What patterns can you see? 
Hydrogen is displaced
When a metal does react with water or hydrochloric acid, it drives hydrogen out, and takes its place. This shows that the metal is more reactive than hydrogen. It has a stronger drive to form a compound. 
But copper and silver do not react with water or acid. So they are less 
reactive than hydrogen.
It is a redox reaction
The displacement of hydrogen is a redox reaction. When magnesium reacts with hydrochloric acid, its atoms lose electrons. The hydrogen ions from the acid gain electrons. The half-equations are:
 magnesium:
 Mg (
s)
  Mg2 1 (aq) 1 2e  2 (oxidation)
 hydrogen ions:
 2H
 1 (aq) + 2e  2  H2 (g) (reduction)
Q
1 W rite a balanced equation for the reaction of potassium 
with water.
2 Which is mor e reactive? And what is your evidence?
 a
 potassium or sodium?
 b
 copper or zinc?3 Which gas is always pr oduced if a metal reacts with water, 
or dilute acid?
4 Explain why the r eaction of iron with hydrochloric acid is a 
redox reaction.

--- Page 187 ---
13.3The behaviour of me Tals
186
Metals in competition
When metals compete
You saw that metals can be put in order of reactivity, using their reactions 
with water and hydrochloric acid. Now let’s see what happens when they compete with each other, and with carbon, to form a compound.
1 C ompeting with carbon
lead(II) oxide +
carbon powderbeads ofmolten lead
heatcrucible
magnesium oxide +
carbon powder
heatlead(II) oxide +carbon powderbeads ofmolten lead
heatcrucible
magnesium oxide +carbon powder
heat
heatMagnesium oxide is mixed with 
powdered carbon and heated.  No reaction! So magnesium must be more reactive than carbon.
Some powdered iron is heated 
with copper(II) oxide, CuO. Can the iron grab the oxygen from the copper(II) oxide?But when lead(II) oxide is used instead, it turns to molten lead, and carbon dioxide gas forms. So carbon is more reactive than lead.
The reaction gives out heat, once 
it gets going. The mixture glows. Iron(II) oxide and copper are formed. The iron has won.The oxides of the metals above were 
also tested. Two were found to be 
more reactive than carbon. The other 
three were less reactive than carbon.
The equation for the reaction with lead(II) oxide is:
  2PbO (
s)
 1
 C (
s)
  2Pb ( s)  1  CO2 (g)
 lead(II) oxide
 1
 carbon
  lead  1  carbon dioxide
The lead has lost oxygen: it has been reduced. Carbon is the reducing agent. The reaction is a redox reaction.
Carbon is more reactive than some metals. It will reduce their oxides 
to form the metal.
2 C ompeting with other metals, for oxygencalcium
aluminiumcarbonzinc
iron
coppermore reactive 
than carbon
less reactive 
than carbon
Other metals were compared in 
the same way. This shows their 
order of reactivity. It is the same as in 
the table on page 185.   zinc
   
iron
   
lead
   
copperthe metal grabs 
oxygen from the 
oxide of the metal 
below it
The tests confirm that iron, zinc, and lead are all more reactive than copper. The equation for the reaction with iron is:
 Fe (
s)
 1
 CuO (
s)
  FeO ( s)  1  Cu ( s)
 
iron
 1
 copper(II) oxide
  iron(II) oxide  1  copper
The iron is acting as a 
reducing agent, removing oxygen. 
A metal will reduce the oxide of a less reactive metal. The reduction always gives out heat – it is exothermic.

--- Page 188 ---
187The behaviour of me Tals
Once again, iron wins against copper. It displaces the copper from the 
copper(II) sulfate solution:
 Fe (
s)
 1
 
CuSO4 (aq)   FeSO4 (aq)  1  Cu ( s)
 
iron
 1
 copper(II) sulfate
  iron(II) sulfate  1  copper
 
  (blue)
  (green)
Other metals displace less reactive metals in the same way
.
A metal displaces a less reactive metal from solutions of its compounds.
They are all redox reactions
All the reactions in this unit are redox reactions: electron transfer takes place in them all. Compare the competitions between iron and copper:
Competing for oxygen Competing to form ions in solution
Equation Fe (s)
 1
 CuO (
s)
  FeO ( s)  1  Cu ( s) Fe (s)  1  CuSO4 (aq)  FeSO4 (aq) 1  Cu ( s)
The half-equations
 
   
for electron loss
 
   
for electron gainFe
  Fe2 1 1 2e  2 
Cu2 1 1 2e 2  Cu  
Fe
  Fe2 1 1 2e 2
Cu2 1 1 2e 2  Cu
The ionic equation
 
   (add the half-equations and   
 
 
   
cancel the electrons) Fe
 1
 Cu2 1  Fe2 1 1 Cu Fe
  1  Cu2 1  Fe2 1 1 Cu
Conclusion In each case the ir
on has given up electrons to form positive ions. 
The copper has accepted electrons, to form copper.
The more reactive metal forms positive ions more readily.iron nail
blue solution of
copper(II) sulfatecoating of copper
on nail
pale green solutioniron nailblue solution of
copper(II) sulfatecoating of copper
on nail
pale green solution
Copper(II) sulfate solution 
contains blue copper(II) ions and sulfate ions. An iron nail is placed in it. Will anything happen?Yes! Copper soon coats the nail. The solution turns green, which indicates iron(II) ions. Iron has pushed copper out of solution. Other metals and solutions were tested too, with the results above. What do you notice about the order of the metals in this list?    zinc
   
iron
   
copper
   
silverthe metal displaces 
the one below it 
from solutions of 
its compounds3 C ompeting to form ions in solution
Q
1 In the r eaction between carbon and lead(II) oxide, which 
substance is oxidised?
2 a  What do you expect to happen when carbon powder is 
heated with:
 i
 calcium oxide?
 ii
 zinc oxide?
 b
 Give a wor
d equation for any reaction that occurs in a.
3 When chr omium(III) oxide is heated with powdered 
aluminium, chromium and aluminium oxide form.
 Which is mor
e reactive, chromium or aluminium?4 Ir on displaces copper from copper(II) sulfate solution. 
 Explain what 
displaces means, in your own words.
5 When copper wir e is put into a colourless solution of silver 
nitrate, crystals of silver form on the wire, and the solution goes blue. Explain these changes.
6 For the r eaction described in 5:
 a
 write the half equations, to show the electr
on transfer
 b
 give the ionic equation for the r
eaction.

--- Page 189 ---
13.4The behaviour of me Tals
188
The reactivity series
Pulling it all together: the reactivity series
We can use the results of the experiments in the last two units to put the 
metals in final order, with the most reactive one first. The list is called the reactivity series. Here it is.
The reactivity series
potassium, K
sodium, Nacalcium, Camagnesium, Mgaluminium, Almost reactive
metals above the blue line: carbon can’t reduce their oxides
carbonzinc, Zniron, Felead, Pbmetals above the red line: they displace hydrogen from acids
hydrogencopper, Cusilver, Aggold, Au least reactive
increasing 
reactivity
The non-metals carbon and hydrogen are included for reference. 
The list is not complete, of course. You could test many other metals, for example tin, and nickel, and platinum, and add them in the right place. 
Things to remember about the reactivity series
1  The reactivity series is really a list of the metals in order of their drive to form positive ions, with stable outer shells. The more easily its atoms can give up electrons, the more reactive the metal will be.
2
  So a metal will react with a compound of a less reactive metal (for example an oxide, or a salt in solution) by pushing the less reactive metal out of the compound and taking its place. 
3
  The more reactive the metal, the more 
stable its compounds are.  
They do not break down easily.
4
  The more reactive the metal, the more dif
ficult it is to extract from its 
ores, since these are stable compounds. For the most reactive metals you need the toughest method of extraction: electrolysis.
5
  The less reactive the metal, the less it likes to form compounds. That is why copper
, silver and gold are found as elements in the Earth’s crust. 
The other metals are always found as compounds.
 A metal’ s position in the reactivity 
series will give you clues about its uses. 
Only unreactive metals are used in coins.
 Copper is used for r oofing, since it is 
unreactive. But over time it does form a coat of blue-green copper(II) carbonate.
!Metals we had to wait for …
 Because they ar e easy to obtain from their ores, the less reactive metals have 
been known and used for thousands of years. For example copper has been  
in wide use for 6000 years, and iron for 3500 years. 
 But the mor e reactive metals, such as sodium and potassium,  
had to wait until the invention of electrolysis, in 1800, for their discovery. 

--- Page 190 ---
189The behaviour of me Tals
 Limestone (calcium carbonate) being 
heated in a lime kiln to give calcium oxide 
(called lime, or quicklime).
 The lime might 
be used to make limewash for buildings, or mixed with sand to make lime mortar. Comparing the stability of some metal compounds 
Many compounds break down easily on heating. In other words, they 
undergo thermal decomposition.
But reactive metals have more stable compounds. Will they break down 
easily? Let’s compare some compounds of sodium and copper:
Compound Effect of heat on the sodium compound Effect of heat on the copper compound
carbonate There is no change in this white compound. This blue-green compound readily breaks down to black 
copper(II) oxide and carbon dioxide:
CuCO3 (s)  CuO ( s)  1  CO2 (g)
hydroxide There is no change in this white compound. This pale blue compound readily breaks down 
to copper(II) oxide and water:
Cu(OH)2 (s)  CuO ( s)  1  H2O (l )
nitrate This white compound partly decomposes 
to the nitrite and oxygen:2NaNO
3 (s)  2NaNO2 (s) 1  O2 (g)
 sodium nitriteThis bright blue compound r
eadily breaks down to 
copper(II) oxide and the brown gas nitrogen dioxide:2Cu(NO
3)2 (s)  2CuO ( s)  1  4NO2 (g) 1  O2 (g)
So the compounds of copper, the less reactive metal, break down easily. 
The compounds of sodium do not.
The general rules for thermal decomposition
These are the general rules:
  The lower a metal is in the reactivity series, the more readily its compounds decompose when heated.
  Carbonates, except those of sodium and potassium, decompose to the 
oxide and carbon dioxide.
  Hydroxides, except those of sodium and potassium, decompose to the 
oxide and water.
  Nitrates, except those of sodium and potassium, decompose to the 
oxide, nitrogen dioxide, and oxygen. The nitrates of sodium and potassium form nitrites and oxygen.
Q
1 a List the metals of the r eactivity series, in order.
 b
 Beside each, say wher
e it occurs in the Periodic Table.
 c
  T
o which group in the Periodic Table do the most reactive 
metals belong?
 d
 Wher
e in the table are the least reactive ones found?
2 Why is magnesium never found as the element, in natur e? 3 Gold has been known and used for thousands of years 
longer than aluminium. Explain why
.
4 Which will br eak down more easily on heating, magnesium 
nitrate or silver nitrate? Why?
5 W rite a balanced equation for the thermal decomposition of 
lead(II) nitrate.

--- Page 191 ---
13.5
magnesiumVoltages of simple cells/V
zinc
2.7
1.1
0.470.310.32
iron
lead
copper0.78increasing
reactivityThe behaviour of me Tals
190
Making use of the reactivity series
Those differences in reactivity are useful!
We make clever use of the differences in reactivity of metals. 
Here are four examples.
1 The therm ite process
This is used to repair rail and tram lines. Powdered aluminium and iron(III) oxide are put in a container over the damaged rail. When the mixture is lit, the aluminium reduces the iron(III) oxide to molten iron, in a very vigorous reaction. The iron runs into the cracks and gaps in the rail, and hardens:
 
Fe2O3(s) 1  2Al ( s)   2Fe ( l)  1  Al2O3 (s)
2 Making simpl e cells
The diagram on the right shows a simple cell – two metal strips standing  in an electrolyte. (You may have met one on page 120.) The bulb is lit, so  a current must be flowing. Hydrogen is forming at the copper strip.  The magnesium strip is dissolving. Why is all this happening?
1
  Magnesium is more reactive than copper: it has a stronger drive to 
form
 ions. So when it is connected to the copper strip, it gives up 
electrons and goes into solution as ions:
 Mg (
s)
  Mg2 1 (aq)  1  2e  2	(oxidation)
2
 Electrons flow along the wire to the copper strip, as a current.
 
 The bulb lights up as the current flows through it.
3
  The solution contains Na
 1 and Cl  2 ions from sodium chloride, and 
some H
 1 and OH  2 ions from water. Hydrogen is less reactive than 
sodium, so the H
 1 ions accept electrons from the copper strip:
 
2H
 1 (aq) 1 2e  2  H2 (g) ( reduction)
So the difference in reactivity has caused a redox reaction, that gives  out energy in the form of electricity.
A simple cell consists of two different metals in an electrolyte. 
Electrons flow from the more reactive metal, so it is called the negative pole. The other metal is the positive pole.
+ –
strip of
magnesium
(it dissolves)strip of
copper
hydrogen
forms
solution of sodium chloridebulb
ﬂow of
electronsVvoltmeter The thermite pr ocess being used to 
join new tram lines.
!The poles in cells …
… are sometimes called electrodes. 
Don't confuse them with the rods in electrolysis!
Using other metals in simple cells
You can use other metals in place of copper and 
magnesium, in a simple cell.
A voltmeter measures the ‘push’ or voltage that 
makes electrons flow. This chart shows the voltage  for different pairs of metals. For example 2.7 V for copper
 /
 magnesium, and 0.47 V for copper
 /
 lead.  
The further apart the metals are in reactivity
,  
the higher the voltage will be.  
Notice how the voltages in the chart add up:  
0.47 V for copper
 /
 lead, 0.31 for lead
 /
 iron, and 
 
0.78 V (0.47 1 0.31) for copper
 /
 iron.

--- Page 192 ---
191The behaviour of me Tals
 The aluminium ladder is pr otected 
from corrosion by its oxide layer.3 The sacrificial pr otection of iron
Iron is used in big structures such as oil rigs and ships. But it has one big 
drawback: it reacts with oxygen and water, forming iron(III) oxide or rust.
To prevent this, the iron can be teamed up with a more reactive metal like 
zinc or magnesium. For example a block of zinc may be welded to the side of a ship. Zinc is more reactive than iron – so the zinc dissolves:
 2Zn (
s)
  2Zn2 1 (aq) 1  4e 2 (oxidation)
The electrons flow to the iron, which passes them on, in this reaction:
 
O2 (g) 1  2H2O (l) 1  4e  2  4OH  2 (aq)  (reduction)
The overall equation for the reaction is:
 2Zn (
s)
 1
 O2 (g) 1  2H2O (l)  2Zn(OH)2 (aq)
So the zinc is oxidised instead of the iron. This is called sacrificial protection. The zinc block must be replaced before it all dissolves away. 
4 Gal vanising
This is another way of using zinc to protect iron. It is used for the steel  in car bodies, and the corrugated iron for roofing. 
 In galvanising, the iron or steel is coated with zinc. For car bodies,  
 this is carried out by a form of electrolysis. For roofing, the iron is 
 
 dipped in a bath of molten zinc. 
  The zinc coating keeps air and moisture away . But if the coating gets 
damaged, the zinc will still protect the iron, by sacrificial protection.
A note about the reactivity of aluminium
Aluminium is more reactive than iron. But we can use it for things like TV aerials, and satellite dishes, and ladders, without protecting it. Why? 
Because aluminium protects itself! It reacts rapidly 
with oxygen, forming a thin coat of aluminium oxide – so thin you cannot see it. 
This sticks tight to the metal, acting as a barrier to 
further corrosion. So the aluminium behaves as if it were unreactive.
(You saw on page 190 that it reacts very vigorously 
with iron(III) oxide in the thermite process. But for this, powdered aluminium is used, and a very hot flame to start the reaction off.) Her e blocks of magnesium have been 
welded to a ship's hull, to prevent the 
steel (an alloy of iron) from corroding.
Q
1 A copper r od and an iron rod stand in an electrolyte.  
If you connect a bulb between them, it will light dimly.
 a
 Why does the curr
ent flow?
 b
 Which acts as the positive electr
ode: copper or iron?
 c
 Suggest two metals you could use to get a brighter light.
2 Fr om the chart on page 190, see if you can work out  
the voltage for a cell that uses magnesium and zinc.3 a Steel for cars is galvanised. What does that mean?
 b
 Explain how this pr
otects the steel.
4 Aluminium is mor e reactive than iron. But unlike iron, we  
do not need to pr
otect it from corrosion. Why not?
5 a  W rite a word equation for the thermite reaction.
 b
  See if you can give 
two reasons why the aluminium is 
powdered, for this reaction.

--- Page 193 ---
Questions
Core curriculum
1 
 a
  List the metals
 given in the table above in order 
of increasing density.
 b
 i
 What is meant by 
density?
  
ii
  A block of metal has a volume of 20 cm3 and 
a mass of 158 g. Which metal is it?
 c
 Now list the metals in order of reactivity
.
 d
 i
  The most reactive metal in the list has a 
density of .....?
  
ii
 The least reactive one has a density of .....?
  
iii
  Does there appear to be a link between density and reactivity? If yes, what?
 e
  Using low-density metals for vehicles saves money on fuel and road repairs. Explain why
.
 f
  Which 
of the low-density metals above is the most 
suitable for vehicles?
 
Why? Give three reasons.
2
 This shows metals in order of reactivity:
  
sodium
 (most reactive)
  
calcium
  
magnesium
  
zinc
  
iron
  
lead
  
copper
  
silver
  (least reactive)
 a
 Which element is stored in oil?
 b
 Which elements will react with cold water?
 c
  Choose one metal that will react with steam but not
 cold water. Draw a diagram of suitable 
apparatus for this reaction. (You must show how the steam is generated.)
 d
 i
  Name the gas given of
f in b and c.
  ii
   
Name another reagent that reacts with many metals to give the same gas.Revision checklist
Core curriculum
Make sure you can …
 explain these terms used about metals:
 malleable             ductile            sonorous
 high density        conductors
 give at least five physical properties of metals
 give four chemical properties of metals
 explain what a reactive element is
 explain what the reactivity series is, and list the metals in it, in the correct order
 describe how the metals in the series react with
 –
 
water
 –
 dilute acids 
 and give word equations where reactions occur
 explain what displacement of hydrogen means
 explain why hydrogen and carbon are often shown  
in the reactivity series, and say where they fit in
 predict the products, when carbon is heated with   
the oxide of a metal below it in the series
Extended curriculum
Make sure you can also …
 state what the products will be, when:
 
–
  a metal is heated with the oxide of a less
 reactive 
metal
 
–
  a metal is placed in the solution of a compound
 
of a less reactive metal
 explain why those reactions are redox reactions
 define thermal decomposition  
 give the ‘rules’ for the ef fect of heat on:
 –
 metal carbonates
 –
 metal hydroxides
 –
 metal nitrates
 and give word equations where reactions occur
 explain what simple cells are, and
 –
 say why a current is produced
 –
 predict which metal will be the positive pole
 –
  decide which pair of metals will give the largest voltage, and why 
 explain what these are for , and why they work,  
and name the metals used:
 –
 sacrificial protection
 –
 
galvanising  
Checkup on Chapter 13
Metal Density in g  / cm3
aluminium 2.7
calcium 1.6
copper 8.9
gold 19.3
iron 7.9
lead 11.4
magnesium 1.7
sodium 0.97The behaviour of me
Tals
192


--- Page 194 ---
3 For each description below , choose one metal that 
fits the description. Name the metal. Then write a 
word equation for the reaction that takes place.
 a
  A metal that displaces copper from copper(II) sulfate solution.
 b
  A metal that reacts gently with dilute hydrochloric acid.
 c
  A metal that floats on water and reacts vigorously with it.
 d
  A metal that reacts quickly with steam but very slowly with cold water
.
4
 Look again at the list of metals in 
2. Carbon can 
be placed between zinc and aluminium.
 a
 Which two of these 
will react?
  
i
  carbon 
1 aluminium oxide
  i
i
  
carbon 1 copper(II) oxide
  iii
  
magnesium 1 carbon dioxide
 b
 W
rite a word equation for the two reactions, 
 and underline the substance that is reduced.
Extended curriculum
5 When magnesium powder is added to copper(II) sulfate solution, a displacement reaction occurs and solid copper forms.
copper(II)
sulfate coppermagnesium
 a W rite a word equation for the reaction.
 b
 Why does the displacement reaction occur?
 c
 i
  W
rite a half-equation to show what happens 
to the magnesium atoms.
  
ii
 Which type of reaction is this?
 d
 i
  W
rite a half-equation to show what happens 
to the copper ions.
  
ii
 Which type of reaction is this?
  
iii
  Which metal shows the greater tendency to
 
form a positive ion?
 e
 i
  W
rite the ionic equation for the displacement 
reaction, by adding the half-equations.
 
  
ii
 Which type of reaction is 
it?
 f
  Use the reactivity series of metals to decide 
whether these will react together:
  
i
 
iron 1 copper(II) sulfate solution
  
ii
 
silver 1 calcium nitrate solution
  
iii
 
zinc 1 lead(II) nitrate solution
 g
 For those that react:
  
i
 describe what you would 
see
  
ii
 write the ionic equations for the reactions.6
 When magnesium and copper(II) oxide are heated together
, this redox reaction occurs:
 Mg (
s)
 1
 CuO (
s)
  MgO ( s)  1  Cu ( s)
 a
 What does the word 
redox stand for?
 b
 For the above reaction, name:
  
i
 the reducing agent
 ii
 the oxidising agent
 c
 Describe the electron transfer in the reaction.
 d
  Explain as fully as you can why the 
reverse 
reaction does not occur.
 e
 i
  Name one metal that would remove the  oxygen from magnesium oxide.
  
ii
  Does this metal 
gain electrons, or lose them, 
more easily than magnesium does?
7
 When the pale blue compound copper(II) hydroxide is heated, thermal decomposition occurs and steam is given of
f.
 a
 i
 What does 
thermal decomposition mean?
  
ii
 W
rite the chemical equation for the reaction.
  
iii
 What colour change would you observe?
 b
  Name a hydroxide that does not decompose when heated.
 c
  In further experiments, nitrates of copper and
 
sodium are heated. 
  
i
 Which gas is released in both experiments?
  
ii
  One of the nitrates also releases the brown
 
gas nitrogen dioxide. Which one?
  
iii
 W
rite the equation for this reaction.
 d
  Relate the observations in 
c to the positions of 
copper and sodium in the reactivity series.
8
 
 Look at the three cells above.
 a
  How can you tell that the three unknown metals are all more reactive than copper?
 b
 Place the metals in order
, most reactive first.
 c
  What voltage will be obtained i
n a cell using: 
 
  
i
 
metals A and B?
 ii
 
metals B and C?
 d
  For each cell in 
c, state which metal is the 
negative terminal.
9
 In simple cells, chemical reactions give electricity
.
 a
  Wh
ich other set-up also involves electricity and 
chemical reactions?
 b
 What is the 
key difference between it and  
 the simple cell?– +
acid copper0.8 V
– +
acid copper0.15 V
– +
acid copper2.6 V
metal
Ametal
Bmetal
CThe behaviour of me Tals
193

--- Page 195 ---
14.1Making use of Metals
194
Metals in the Earth’ s crust
The composition of the Earth’s crust
We get some metals from the sea, but most from the Earth’s crust –  
the Earth’s hard outer layer.  
The crust is mostly made of compounds. But it also contains some 
elements such as copper, silver, mercury, platinum, and gold.  These occur native, or uncombined, because they are unreactive. 
If you could break all the crust down to elements, you would find it is 
almost half oxygen! This shows its composition:
Note that:
  two non-metals, oxygen and silicon, make up nearly three-quarters  
of the crust. They occur together in compounds such as silicon dioxide 
(silica or sand). Oxygen is also found in compounds such as iron(III)  oxide, aluminium oxide, and calcium carbonate.
  just six metals – aluminium to potassium in the pie chart – make up  
over one-quarter of the crust. Aluminium is the most abundant of these,  
and iron next. All six occur as compounds, because they are reactive. 
all the other metals
and non-metals 2%potassium 1.5%sodium 2.5%magnesium 3%calcium 5%iron 6%aluminium 8%
silicon
27%
(over a quarter)oxygen
45%
(nearly half) Light metals such as aluminium and 
titanium are used in the International 
Space Station, 360 km above us. 
 We use about nine times more iron 
than all the other metals put together.
Scarce, and precious …
All the other metals together make up less than 2%  
of the Earth’s crust. Many, including lead, zinc, and copper, are considered scarce.
Gold, silver, platinum, and palladium are called 
precious metals because they are scarce, expensive, and often kept as a store of wealth. 
The car industry uses a lot of metal. Cars are mainly 
steel, plus over 5% aluminium. But the steel is coated with zinc, and the bumpers with nickel and chromium. The electrics depend on copper, the battery uses lead, and modern exhausts contain palladium, platinum, and rhodium as catalysts.
 Metals on wheels. 

--- Page 196 ---
195Making use of Metals
Metal ores
The rocks in the Earth’s crust are a mixture of substances. Some contain 
a large amount of one metal compound, or one metal, so it may be worth digging them up to extract the metal. Rocks from which metals are obtained are called ores. For example:
This is a chunk of rock salt, the main ore of sodium. It is mostly sodium chloride. This is a piece of bauxite, the main ore of aluminium. It is mostly aluminium oxide.Since gold is unreactive, it occurs native (uncombined). This sample is almost pure gold. 
 The world's biggest man-made hole: 
the Bingham Canyon copper mine in 
Utah, USA. Started in 1906, it is now  over 1 km deep and 4 km wide. To mine or not to mine?
Before starting to mine an ore, the mining company must decide whether 
it is economical. It must find answers to questions like these:
1
 How much ore is there?
2
 How much metal will we get from it?
3
 Are there any special problems about getting the ore out?
4
  How much will it cost to mine the ore and extract the metal from it? 
 
(The cost will include roads, buildings, mining equipment, the 
extraction plant, transport, fuel, chemicals, and wages.)
5
 How much will we be able to sell the metal for?
6
 So will we make a profit if we go ahead?
The answers to these questions will change from year to year
. For example 
if the selling price of a metal rises, even a low-quality or low-grade ore may become worth mining.
The local people may worry that the area will be spoiled, and the air and 
rivers polluted. So they may object to plans for a new mine. On the positive side, they may welcome the new jobs that mining will bring.
Q
1 Which is the main element in the Earth’s crust?
2 Which is the most common metal in the Earth’s crust?
 Which is the second?
3 Gold occurs native in the Earth’s crust. Explain.
4  Is it true that the most r eactive metals are quite  
plentiful in the Earth’s crust?5 Some metals ar e called precious. Why? Name four.
6 One metal is used mor e than all the others put together. 
Which one? Why is it so popular?
7 What is a metal ore?
8 Name the main or e of:  a  sodium  b  aluminium
 What is the main compound in each or
e?

--- Page 197 ---
14.2Making use of Metals
196
Extracting metals from their ores
!Reduction of metal ores
Remember, you can define 
reduction as:
 loss of oxygen
 
Fe2O3  Fe
 or gain of electr ons
 
Fe3 1 1 3e  2  Fe
Either way
, the ore is reduced to  
the metal.Extraction
After mining an ore, the next step is to remove or extract the metal from 
it. How you do this? It depends on the metal’s reactivity. 
  The most unreactive metals – such as silver and gold – occur in their ores as elements. All you need to do is separate the metal from sand and other impurities. This is like removing stones from soil. It does  not involve chemical reactions. 
  The ores of all the other metals contain the metals as compounds.  
These have to be reduced, to give the metal:
 metal compound
 reduction
 metal
  The compounds of the more reactive metals are very stable, and need electrolysis to reduce them. This is a powerful method, but it 
costs  
a lot because it uses a lot of electricity.
  The compounds of the less reactive metals are less stable, and can  
be reduced using a suitable reducing agent.
Extraction and the reactivity series
So the method of extraction is strongly linked to the reactivity series,  as shown below. Carbon is included for reference. 
Carbon as a reducing agent
As you saw on page 186, carbon will react with oxides of metals less reactive than itself, reducing them to the metal.
Luckily, many ores are oxides, or compounds easily converted to oxides.The table shows that carbon can be used to extract zinc, iron, and lead.  
It is used in the form of coke (made from coal), which is heated with the metal oxide in a furnace. But in the process, carbon may react with a limited supply of oxygen, giving carbon monoxide gas (CO). In that case, the carbon monoxide brings about the actual reduction. Metal Method of extraction from ore
potassium
sodiumcalciummagnesiumaluminium
carbon
zinc
ironleadsilvergoldelectrolysis
heating with a reducing agent – 
carbon or carbon monoxide
occur naturally as elements  
so no chemical reactions neededmetals more 
reactiveores more 
difficult to 
decomposemethod  
of extraction 
more powerfulmethod  
of extraction 
more expensive
 No need to reduce gold … 

--- Page 198 ---
Three examples of ore extraction
1 Iron ore  This is mainly iron(III) oxide. It is reduced like this:
  iron(III) oxide
 1 carbon monoxide 
   iron  1  carbon dioxide
   
Fe2O3 (s) 1  3CO (  g )   2Fe (l)  1  3CO2 ( g)
 W
e will look more closely at this extraction in Unit 14.3.
2
  Aluminium ore
 This is mainly aluminium oxide. Aluminium is more 
reactive than carbon, so electrolysis is needed for this reduction:
  aluminium oxide
 
   aluminium  1 oxygen 
   
2Al2O3 (l)  4Al ( l)  1  3O2 ( g) 
 W
e will look more closely at this extraction in Unit 14.4.
3
  Zinc blende
 This is mainly zinc sulfide, ZnS. First it is roasted in air
, 
giving zinc oxide and sulfur dioxide:
  zinc sulfide
 1 oxygen 
   zinc oxide  1 sulfur dioxide 
  2ZnS (
s)
 1
 3O2 ( g)  2ZnO ( s)  1  2SO2 ( g)
 Then the oxide is reduced in one of these two ways:
 i
 Using carbon monoxide
 This is carried out in a furnace:
   zinc oxide
 1 carbon monoxide
 
   zinc  1  carbon dioxide
 
 ZnO (
s)
 1
 CO (
 g
)
   Zn ( s) 1  CO2 ( g)
  The final mixture contains zinc and a slag of impurities. The zinc is 
separated by fractional distillation. (It boils at 907
 °C.)
  ii
 Using electrolysis
 For this, a compound must be melted, or in 
solution. But zinc oxide has a very high melting point (1975
 °C), and is 
insoluble in water! 
 I
nstead, it is dissolved in dilute sulfuric acid (made from the sulfur  
 dioxide produced in the roasting stage)
. Zinc oxide is a base, so it 
  
 neutralises the acid, giving a solution of zinc sulfate. This undergoes 
 
 electrolysis, and zinc is deposited at the cathode:
  Zn2 1 (aq) 1 2e  2    Zn ( s)   (reduction)
 The zinc is scraped of
f the cathode, and melted into bars to sell. 
  In fact most zinc is extracted by electrolysis, because this gives zinc of very high purity
. Cadmium and lead occur as impurities in the zinc 
blende, and these metals are recovered and sold too.
197Making use of Metals
!Zinc metal is used …
 to galvanise  iron – coat it to  
stop it rusting (page 191) 
 in the sacrificial protection of 
iron structures (page 191)
 to make alloys such as brass  
and bronze (page 203)
 to make batteries (page 122) After extraction, some aluminium is 
made into rolls like these, ready for sale.
Q
1 Why is no chemical r eaction needed to get gold?
2 Lead is extracted by heating its oxide with carbon: 
 lead oxide 
1 carbon  lead 1 carbon monoxide
 a
 Why can carbon be used for this r
eaction?
 b
 One substance is 
reduced. Which one?
 c
 Which substance is the r
educing agent?3 The r eaction in question 2 is a redox reaction. Why?
4 Sodium is extracted fr om rock salt (sodium chloride).
 a
 Electr
olysis is needed for this. Explain why.
 b
 W
rite a balanced equation for the reaction. 
5 Zinc blende is an or e of zinc. It is mainly … ?
6  Describe the extraction of zinc by electr olysis.
 An iron bucket, galvanised with zinc.

--- Page 199 ---
14.3Making use of Metals
198
Extracting iron
The blast furnace
This diagram shows the blast furnace used for extracting iron from its 
ore. It is an oven shaped like a chimney, at least 30 metres tall.
iron forms
and trickles down
(400 /H11034C)hopper for
loading chargenew chargeadded here
wastegases out
waste gases out(used to heat upthe air blast)
blast ofhot air inblast ofhot air in
molten slag
plug holeplug holecarbon monoxide
forms and rises
(800 /H11034C)
carbon dioxide
forms and rises
(1400 /H11034C)
molten iron
A mixture called the charge, containing the iron ore, is added through the 
top of the furnace. Hot air is blasted in through the bottom. After a series of reactions, liquid iron collects at the bottom of the furnace. 
What’s in the charge?
The charge contains three things:
1
  Iron ore
.
 The chief ore of iron is called 
hematite. It is mainly iron(III) 
oxide, Fe2O3, mixed with sand and some other compounds.
2
 Limestone
.
 This common rock is mainly calcium carbonate, CaCO3.
3
 Coke
.
 This is made from coal, and is almost pure carbon.
 Blast furnaces run non-stop 24 hours 
a day.
 Mining hematite.

--- Page 200 ---
199Making use of Metals
Q
1 W rite the equation for the redox reaction that gives iron.
2 What is the ‘blast’ of the blast fur nace?
3  Name the waste gases fr om the blast furnace.4  The calcium carbonate in the blast fur nace helps to  
purify the iron. Explain how, with an equation.
5 The slag and waste gases ar e both useful. How?The reactions in the blast furnace
Reactions, products, and waste gases Comments
Stage 1:
 The coke bur
ns, giving off heat
The blast of hot air starts the coke burning.  
It reacts with the oxygen in the air, giving carbon dioxide: 
carbon 1 oxygen 
   carbon dioxide
 C (
s)
 1
 O2 (g)   CO2 (g)This, like all combustion, is a redox reaction.  
The carbon is oxidised to carbon dioxide.  The blast of air provides the oxygen for the reaction. The reaction is exothermic – it gives off heat, which helps to heat the furnace.
Stage 2:
 Carbon monoxide is made
The carbon dioxide r
eacts with more coke, like this:
carbon 1 carbon dioxide 
   carbon monoxide
 C (
s)
 1
 CO2 (g)  2CO ( g)In this redox reaction, the carbon dioxide loses oxygen. It is reduced.
The reaction is endothermic – it takes in heat from the furnace. 
That’s good: stage 3 needs a lower temperature.
Stage 3:
 The ir
on(III) oxide is reduced
This is where the actual extraction occurs.  Carbon monoxide reacts with the iron ore, giving liquid iron:
iron(III) oxide
  1 carbon
 monoxide  ir on    1  carbon dioxide 
 Fe2O3 (s) 1  3CO (  g )    2Fe ( l  )  1  3CO2 ( g)
The iron trickles to the bottom of the furnace. 
In this redox reaction, carbon monoxide is the reducing agent.  It reduces the iron(III) oxide to the metal. The carbon monoxide is oxidised to carbon dioxide.
What is the limestone for?The limestone breaks down in the heat of the furnace:
CaCO
3  CaO (s) 1 CO2 ( g)
The calcium oxide that forms reacts with the sand, 
which is mainly silicon dioxide or silica:
calcium oxide 1 silica
  calcium silicate 
 CaO (
 s
)
 1
 SiO2 (s)  CaSiO3 ( s) 
The calcium silicate forms a 
slag which runs down the furnace 
and floats on the iron.The purpose of this reaction is to produce calcium oxide, 
which will remove the sand that was present in the ore.   Calcium oxide is a basic oxide. Silica is an acidic oxide.  Calcium silicate is a salt.
The molten slag is drained off. When it solidifies it is sold,  
mostly for road building.
The waste gases: hot carbon dioxide and nitrogen come  out from the top of the furnace. The heat is transferred from  them to heat the incoming blast of air.The carbon dioxide is from the reaction in stage 3. The nitrogen is from the air blast. It has not taken part in  the reactions so has not been changed.
Where next? 
The iron from the blast furnace is called pig iron.  
It is impure. Carbon and sand are the main impurities.
Some is run into moulds to make cast iron. This is 
hard but brittle, because of its high carbon content – so it is used only for things like canisters for bottled gas (page 252) and drain covers.
But most of the iron is turned into steels. You can 
find how this is done in Unit 14.6.
 A cast-iron drain cover.

--- Page 201 ---
14.4
From rocks to rockets
Aluminium is the most abundant metal in the Earth’s crust. Its main ore is 
bauxite, which is aluminium oxide mixed with impurities such as sand and iron oxide. The impurities make it reddish brown.
These are the steps in obtaining aluminium:Making use of Metals
200
Extracting aluminium
1 First, geologists test rocks and 
analyse the results, to find out how 
much bauxite there is. If the tests are satisfactory
, mining begins.2  Bauxite is red-brown in colour. 
It is usually near the surface, so is easy to dig up. This is a bauxite mine in Jamaica. 3
  The ore is taken to a bauxite 
plant, where impurities are removed. The result is white aluminium oxide, or alumina.
4 The alumina is taken to another 
plant for electrolysis. 
It may even 
be sent to another country where electricity is cheaper.5
  The extracted metal is made 
into sheets and blocks, and sold to other industries. It has a great many uses. For example … 6
  … i t is used to make drinks 
cans, food cartons, cooking foil, bikes, TV aerials, electricity cables, ships, trains, and space rockets.
The electrolysis
The electrolysis is carried out in a large steel tank. (See next page.)  This is lined with carbon, which acts as the cathode (2). Big blocks  of carbon hang in the middle of the tank, and act as the anode (1).
Alumina melts at 2045
 °C. It would be impossible to keep the tank that 
hot. Instead, the alumina is dissolved in molten 
cryolite, or sodium 
aluminium fluoride, which has a much lower melting point.

--- Page 202 ---
201Making use of Metals
Q
1 Which compounds ar e used in the extraction of  
aluminium? Say what role each plays.
2 a  Sketch the electr olysis cell for extracting aluminium.
 b
 Why do the aluminium ions move to the cathode? 
 
c
 What happens at the cathode? Give an equation.
 
d
 The anode is r
eplaced regularly. Why?3 These terms all describe pr operties of aluminium.  
Say what each term means. 
 a
 malleable 
 b
 ductile
 c
 
non-toxic
 d
 low density 
 e
 r
esistant to corrosion
4 List six uses of aluminium. For each, say which pr operties 
of the metal make it suitable.The electrolysis tank
This is the tank for the electrolysis of aluminium:
++ +carbon anode
oxygen bubbling off
ore dissolved in molten
cryolite, at about 950 °C
molten aluminium outcarbon cathode
(lining of cell)
steel cell
molten
aluminium
 Moltem aluminium from the tank was 
run into these moulds, to make blocks. 
 Electricity cables: aluminium (light) 
with a steel core (strong).The reactions at the electrodes 
Once the alumina dissolves, its aluminium and oxide ions are  
free to move. They move to the electrode of opposite charge.
At the cathode
 The aluminium ions gain electrons:
  
 4Al
 3 1 (l) 1 12e  2   4Al ( l)  (reduction)  
The aluminium drops to the bottom of the cell as molten metal. 
 
This is run off at intervals. Some will be mixed with other metals  
to make alloys. Some is run into moulds, to harden into blocks. 
At the anode
 The oxygen ions lose electrons:
 6O
 2 2 (l)    3O2 (g) 1 12e 2 (oxidation)
The oxygen gas bubbles of
f, and reacts with the anode: 
 C (
s) 1 O2 ( g)    CO2 ( g) (oxidation of carbon) 
So the carbon blocks get eaten away
, and need to be replaced.
The overall reaction
 The 
alumina is broken down, giving aluminium:
 aluminium oxide
 
   aluminium  1 oxygen
 
2Al2O3 (l)  4Al (l)  1  3O2 (g) 
Some properties of aluminium
1 It is a bluish-silver , shiny metal.
2
 It has a low density – it is ‘light’. Iron is three times heavier
.
3
 It is a good conductor of heat and electricity
.
4
 It is malleable and ductile.
5
 It resists corrosion. 
This is because a fine coat of aluminium oxide  
 forms on its surface, and acts as a barrier
. (See page 191.) 
6
  It is not very strong when pure, but it can be made 
much stronger  
by mixing it with other metals to form alloys. (See page 203.)
7
 It is generally 
non-toxic (not harmful to health). But taking in large 
 quantities could harm you. 

--- Page 203 ---
14.5
Properties dictate uses
Think of all the solid things you own, or use, or see around you. Some  
are probably made of wood, or plastic, or stone, or cloth. But which are made of metal, or contain metal? 
Metals share some properties. Each also has its own special properties. 
How we use the metals depends on their properties. You would not use poisonous metals for food containers, for example.
Here are some examples of uses:
Metal Used for … Properties that make it suitable
aluminium overhead electricity cables (with a steel core for 
strength)a good conductor of electricity (not as good as copper, but cheaper and much lighter); ductile, resists corrosion
cooking foil and food cartons non-toxic, resistant to corrosion, can be rolled into thin sheets 
drinks cans light, non-toxic, resistant to corrosion
coating CDs and DVDs can be deposited as a thin film; shiny surface reflects laser beam
copper electrical wiring one of the best conductors of electricity, ductile
saucepans and saucepan bases malleable, conducts heat well, unreactive, tough
zinc protecting steel from rusting offers sacrificial protection to the iron in steel
coating or galvanising iron and steel resists corrosion, but offers sacrificial protection if coating cracks
for torch batteries gives a current when connected to a carbon pole, packed  into a paste of electrolyteMaking use of 
M
etals
202
Making use of metals and alloys
Aluminium foil is used for food 
cartons because it is non-toxic, resists corrosion, and can be rolled into thin sheets.Copper is used for electrical wiring in homes, because it is an excellent conductor, and easily drawn into wires. Zinc is coated onto steel car bodies, before they are painted, because zinc protects the steel from rusting, by sacrificial protection.
A summary of their uses
The three metals above have other uses too. Look at this table:

--- Page 204 ---
203Making use of Metals
Q
1 See if you can give two new examples of a use for a metal, 
that depends on the metal being:
 a
 a good conductor
 b
 non-toxic
 c
 
strong
 d
 r
esistant to corrosion2 Br onze is 95% copper and 5% tin.
 a
 What is a 
mixture like this called?
 b
 What can you say about its pr
operties?
 c
 See if you can give an example of a use for br
onze.mixture of
metalsalloy (different metalatoms in lattice)
force
force
This shows the atoms in a pure 
metal. They are arranged in a regular lattice. (In fact they are metal ions in a sea of electrons, as you saw on page 62.)When pressure is applied, for example by hammering the metal, the layers can slide over each other easily. That is why a metal is malleable and ductile.But when the metal is turned into an alloy, new atoms enter the lattice. The layers can no longer slide easily. So the alloy is stronger than the original metal.Alloys: making metals more useful
The uses on page 202 are for the pure metals. But often a metal is more useful when mixed with another substance. The mixture is called an alloy.
For example, mixing molten zinc and copper gives the gold-coloured alloy 
called brass. When this solidifies, it is hard, strong, and shiny. It is used for door locks, keys, knobs, and musical instruments such as trumpets. 
Turning a metal into an alloy changes its properties, and makes it 
more useful. 
Why an alloy has different properties
It is not only strength that changes: other properties will change too.  For example the alloy may be more resistant to corrosion than the original metal was. 
You can add more than one substance. You can try out different amounts 
of different substances, to design an alloy with exactly the properties that you need.
Some examples of alloys
There are thousands of different alloys. Here are a couple of examples,  for the metals on the opposite page.
Alloy Made from Special properties Uses
brass 70% copper
30% zincharder than copper, does not corrodemusical instruments, ornaments,door knobs and other fittings
aluminium  alloy 7075 TF90.25% aluminium6% zinc2.5% magnesium1.25% copperlight but very strong  does not corrodeaircraft
Look at the aluminium alloy. Aircraft need materials that are light but 
very strong, and will not corrode. Pure aluminium is not strong enough. So hundreds of aluminium alloys have been developed, for aircraft parts.  In an alloy, the atoms of the second 
metal must enter the lattice. So you need 
to melt the metals first, then mix them.
 Blow your own (brass) trumpet.

--- Page 205 ---
14.6
Steels: alloys of iron
Iron is very widely used – but almost never on its own.Making use of Metals
204
Steels and steel-making
Pure iron is no good for building 
things, because it is too soft, and stretches quite easily, as you can see from this photo. Even worse,  it rusts very easily.
 Scalpel, please! Stainless steel saves lives. It is easy to sterilise, 
which is very important in surgery. Mild steel is used for washing machines and fridges,  
as well as for cars.But when it has a very small amount of carbon mixed with it, the result is a mild steel. This is hard 
and strong. It is used for buildings, ships, car bodies, and machinery.When nickel and chromium are mixed with iron, the result is stainless steel. This is hard and rustproof. It is used for cutlery, and equipment in chemical factories.
So mild steel and stainless steel are alloys of iron. Some typical mixtures are:
 mild steel 
2 99.7% iron and 0.3% carbon
 stainless steel 
2 70% iron, 20% chromium, and 10% nickel
There are many other types of steel too, all with different properties.
force 
applied

--- Page 206 ---
205Making use of Metals
Q
1 What is the main metal, in steels?
2 a Why is oxygen blown thr ough the molten iron?
 b
 See if you can write a wor
d equation for two reactions 
 
 which occur at this stage, that r
emove carbon.
3 What is special about calcium oxide, that makes it useful 
 in steel-making?4 Mild steel contains a very small % of carbon. 
 a
 Draw diagrams to show clearly the dif
ference 
 
 between pur
e iron and mild steel.
 (Show atoms!
)
 b
 Explain why mild steel is str
onger than iron.
5 Alloys ar e a type of solution. Explain why. 
6 Name the metals in stainless steel. Very often, scrap iron is added to the molten pig iron in  
the oxygen furnace. So the iron gets recycled as new steel.
Making steels
Steels are made using the molten iron from the blast furnace.  
As you saw
, this molten iron is impure. It contains about 5% carbon,  
from the coke used in the furnace, plus sand (which is mainly silicon 
dioxide) and phosphorus and sulfur compounds, from the iron ore.
1
 First, unwanted impurities are removed from the iron. 
 
–
  The molten iron from the blast furnace is poured into an 
oxygen 
furnace, and a jet of oxygen is turned on. 
 –
  The oxygen reacts with the 
carbon, forming carbon monoxide and 
carbon dioxide gases, which are carried off. It reacts with other  
impurities to form acidic oxides.
 
–  Then calcium oxide is added. It is a basic oxide. It reacts with silicon  
dioxide and the other acidic oxides, to give a 
slag that is skimmed off. 
  For some steels, 
all impurities are removed. But many steels are just 
iron plus a little carbon. Carbon makes steel stronger – but too much makes it brittle, and hard to shape. So the carbon content is checked continually. When it is correct, the oxygen is turned off.
2
  Then other elements may be added. 
 
These are measured out carefully, to give steels such as stainless steel,  with the required properties. 
!About calcium oxide
Calcium oxide is also called lime  
and quicklime.
 Molten steel being poured out, in a steel works. Look how  
it glows. Temperature: around 1400
 °C.
!Recycling iron and steel
Iron and steel are the most recycled metals in the world.
 It costs far less to r ecycle them 
than to mine new ore and extract the iron – and it is better for the environment.
 It is easy to separate them fr om 
other scrap: use a big magnet.
 It is easy to r ecyle them: just add 
them to the oxygen furnace.
Old cars, fridges and washing machines … all get recycled.

--- Page 207 ---
206Making use of Metals
Metals, civilisation, and you 
No you without metals
Without metals you probably would not exist. You certainly would not  
be reading this book. The world would not have nearly 7 billion people.
Our human history has been shaped by the discovery of metals. That is 
why two of our eras are known as the Bronze Age and the Iron Age. 
Metals and civilisation
  200 000 years ago
farming starts
 
 8000 BC
Earound here
gold known
 6000 BC
E
copper and silver
 
 4000 BCEknown
tin and lead known
 3500 BC
E
iron began to be used
 1500 BC
E
just 7 metals known
 1 
CEby 1 CE: gold, copper,
silver, lead, tin, iron, and mercury
 
Industrial Revolution starts around here.
 1750 
CE
24 metals known
 1800 
CE 
65 metals known
 1900 
CE
over 90 metals known
 2000 
CE
Where next?The Stone Age
The early humans were hunters and gatherers. We had to kill 
and chop to get meat and fruit and firewood. We used stone and bone as tools and weapons.
Then, about 10 000 years ago, we began to farm. Farming 
started in the Middle East. As it spread, great civilisations grew – for example in the valley of the River Indus, in Asia, around 9000 years ago.
The Bronze Age
By 3500 BCE (over 5000 years ago) copper and tin were known – but not much used, since they are quite soft. Then someone made a discovery: mixing molten copper and tin gives a strong hard metal that can be hammered into different shapes. It was the alloy bronze. The Bronze Age was here!
Now a whole new range of tools could be made, for both 
farming and fighting.
The Iron Age 
Our ancestors had no use for iron – until one day, around 2500 years ago, some got heated up with charcoal (carbon). Perhaps by accident, in a hot fire. A soggy mess of impure iron collected at the bottom of the fire. 
The iron was hammered into shape with a stone. The result was 
a metal with vast potential. In time it led to the Industrial Revolution. It is still the most widely used metal on the Earth.
The Digital Age 
We still depend on iron. But computers now touch every aspect of life. There would be no computing – and no satellites, or TV, or mobile phones – without hi-tech metals like selenium and titanium, and old favourites like aluminium and copper. Many new hi-tech uses are being found for these metals and their alloys.
!Time past and present
 ce stands for common era. It 
means the period since 1 ad.
 bce stands for before common 
era. It means the same as bc.

--- Page 208 ---
207Making use of Metals
The earliest metals 
The first metals found were the unreactive ones that exist as elements: 
gold, copper, and silver. But these were too soft on their own to have many uses, other than for ornaments, jewellery, and coins. 
Tin, lead, and iron occur naturally as compounds, so have to be extracted 
by chemical reactions. It could have happened by accident, at the start. Some ore could have fallen into a fire where charcoal was burning. Or the molten metals could have appeared from clay being baked in pottery kilns, where the enclosed fires are very hot.
The invention of electrolysis
By 250 years ago, only 24 metals were known: those found naturally as elements, plus others that could be extracted easily in a furnace, using carbon. Nobody had set eyes on sodium or magnesium, for example.
Then in 1800, the first ever electrolysis was carried out (of water). 
The scientist Humphry Davy heard about it, and tried it out on molten compounds – with amazing results! He discovered potassium and sodium in 1807, and magnesium, calcium, strontium, and barium in 1808.
The discovery of aluminium
Aluminium is the most common metal in the Earth’s crust. But it was not extracted until 1825, when aluminium chloride and potassium were heated together. (Potassium, being more reactive, displaces aluminium from its compounds.)
Only small amounts of aluminium could be extracted this way. So it 
became more valuable than gold! Then in 1886, the way to extract it by electrolysis, using cryolite, was developed. Aluminium had arrived. 
Any more metals to find?
We know about all the metals in the Earth’s crust by now. However, new metals are still being discovered. But they are artificial elements, made in labs, and radioactive. They usually break down very very fast.
 The lead or e galena (lead sulfide) was used as eye make-up 
in ancient Egypt. Lead was probably produced by heating 
galena in an open fire. A moder n use of metals: this x-ray shows a replacement hip 
joint made from titanium. Titanium is suitable since it is strong, light, non-toxic, and does not corrode. 
 Th is gold collar is around 3000 years 
old. It was found in Ireland. 
 Humphry Davy died at 52, of an 
illness pr
obably caused by harmful 
vapours from electrolysis. Beware!


--- Page 209 ---
Checkup on Chapter 14
Questions
Core curriculum
1 This table gives information about the extraction  
of three different metals from their main ores:
metal formula of main 
compound in oremethod of extraction
iron Fe
2O3 heating with carbon
aluminium Al2O3 electrolysis
sodium NaCl electrolysis
 a Give: 
 i
 the chemical name of each compound shown
 
 ii
 the common names for the three ores
 
b
 Arrange the three metals in order of reactivity
.
 c
 i
  How are the two more reactive metals 
extracted from their ores?
  
ii
 Explain why this is a reduction of the ores.
 d
 i
  How is the least reactive metal extracted from its ore?
  
ii
 Explain why this is a reduction of the ore.
  
iii
  Why can this method not be used for the more reactive metals?
 e
 Which of the methods would you use to extract:
  
i
 
potassium?
 ii
 lead?
 iii
 magnesium?
 f
  Gold is 
found native in the Earth’s crust. 
Explain what native means.
 g
 Where should gold go, in your list 
for b?
 h
 Name another metal that occurs native.
2
 a
  Draw a diagram of the blast furnace. Show clearly on your diagram:
  i
 where air is 
blasted into the furnace
  
ii
 where the molten iron is removed
  
iii
 where a second liquid is removed
 b
 i
 Name the three raw materials used.
  
ii
 What is the purpose of each material?
 c
 i
 Name the second liquid that is removed.
  
ii
  When it solidifies, does it have any uses? 
 
If so, name one.
 d
 i
 Name a waste gas from the furnace.
  
ii
 Does this gas have a use? If so, what?
 e
 i
  W
rite an equation for the chemical reaction 
that produces the iron.
  
ii
  Explain why this is a reduction of the iron 
 
compound.
  
iii
 What acts as the reducing agent?Revision checklist
Core curriculum
Make sure you can …
  name the two most common metals in the  
Earth’s crust
  explain what an ore is, and name the main ores 
of aluminium and iron
 explain what extracting a metal means
  say how the method used to extract a metal  
depends on the reactivity of the metal
  explain why electrolysis is needed to extract some  
metals, and name at least two of them
  for the extraction of iron in the blast furnace:
 –
  name the raw materials and explain the purpose
 
of each
 –
 draw a labelled sketch 
of the blast furnace
 –
  give word equations for the reactions that
 
take place
 –
 give uses for the waste products that form
 –
  name two impurities present in the molten iron
  give at least two uses of aluminium , and state the 
properties that make it suitable for those uses
  explain what alloys are, and draw a diagram to  
show the structure of an alloy
  explain why an alloy is usually harder and stronger  
than the original metal
  explain what brass is,  and say what it is used for
  describe how iron from the blast furnace is turned  
into steels
 say what is in this alloy , and what it is used for: 
–
 mild steel
 –
 stainless steel
Extended curriculum
Make sure you can also …
  describe the extraction of zinc from zinc blende
  describe the extraction of aluminium from  
aluminium oxide, with the help of cryolite
  (you will not be asked to draw the electrolysis cell)
  give uses for copper and zinc, and state the  
properties that lead to those usesMaking use of Metals
208


--- Page 210 ---
Extended curriculum
3 The diagram above shows stages in obtaining 
copper from a low-grade ore. Th
e ore contains 
copper(II) sulfide, CuS. It may also contain small amounts of silver, gold, platinum, iron, cadmium, zinc, and arsenic.
 a
 What is an 
ore?
 b
 What is a 
low-grade ore?
 c
 i
  How much waste rock is removed per tonne in 
step 1?
  
ii
  What 
% of the ore in B is finally extracted as  
pure copper?
 d
 Why might it be economic to extract copper 
 
 from a low-grade ore like this?
 e
 i
  Which type of reaction occurs in 
step 2?
  
ii
  W
ith what could the copper ore be reacted,  
to obtain the metal?
 f
 i
  Wh
ich process is carried out at step 3, to 
purify the metal?
  
ii
 What will the main cost in this process be?
  
iii
  As well as pure copper
, this process may 
produce other valuable substances.  Explain why, and where they will be found.
 g
  List some of the environmental problems that may arise in going from A to D. 
4
 Zinc and lead are obtained from ores that contain only the metal and sulfur
, in the molar ratio 1:1.
 a
 Name the compounds in these ores.
 b
 W
rite down their formulae.
 In the extraction of the metal, the compounds are roasted in air to obtain the oxide of the metal. 
 The sulfur forms sulfur dioxide. 
 c
 i
 W
rite equations for the roasting of the ores.
  
ii
 Which type of reaction is this?
  
iii
  Care must be taken in disposing of the sulfur dioxide produced. Explain why
. 
 Then the oxide can be heated with coke (carbon) to obtain the metal and carbon monoxide.
 d i  W
rite equations for the reactions with carbon.
  
ii
  Which substances are reduced, in the reactions?5
 Aluminium is the most abundant metal in the Earth’
 s crust. Iron is next. 
 Iron and aluminium are extracted from their ores in large quantities. The table below summari
ses the 
two extraction processes.
Extraction Iron Aluminium
Chief ore hematite bauxite
Formula of main 
compound in oreFe2O3 Al2O3
Energy source usedburning of coke in air (exothermic reaction)electricity
Other substances used in extractionlimestone carbon (graphite) 
cryolite
Temperature at hottest part of reactor
 /
 °C1900 1000
How the metal
 
separates from the reaction mixturemelts and collects at the bottommelts and collects at the bottom
Other products carbon dioxide 
sulfur dioxide slagcarbon dioxide
 a In each extraction, is the metal oxide oxidised 
  
or reduced, when it is converted to the metal?
 b
 
Explain why each of these substances is used:
  
i
 limestone in the extraction of iron
  
ii
 carbon in the extraction of aluminium
  
iii
 cryolite in the extraction of aluminium.
 c
 Describe any two similarities in the extraction 
 
 processes for aluminium and iron.
 d
 Give a use for the slag that is produced as a 
 
 by-product in the extraction of iron.
 e
  Aluminium costs over three times as much per 
tonne as iron. Suggest two reasons why aluminium is more expensive than iron, even though it is more abundant in the Earth’
s crust.
 f
  Most of the iron produced is converted into steels.
 i
 Why?
  ii
 How is this carried out? 
 g
  Both steel and aluminium are recycled. 
 
Suggest reasons why it is important to recycle these metals.1 tonne (1000 kg)
of rock + copper oreA B C D
Step 1 Step 2 Step 3
10 kg of
concentrated copper ore2.5 kg of
copper, 99% purealmost 2.5 kg of
copper, 99.9% pureMaking use of Metals
209

--- Page 211 ---
15.1
The Earth’s atmosphere
The atmosphere is the blanket of gas around the Earth. 
It is about 700 km thick. We live in the lowest layer, the troposphere. 
(Look at the diagram.) The gas is at its most dense here, thanks to gravity. As you go up, it quickly thins out. In fact 90% of the mass of the atmosphere is in the lowest 16 km. 
Here in the troposphere, we usually call the atmosphere air. 
What is in air?
This pie chart shows the gases that make up clean air:
The composition of the air changes very slightly from day to day, and 
place to place. For example:
  there is more water vapour in the air around you on a damp day. 
 pollutants such as carbon monoxide and sulfur dioxide  are likely to  
 be given out from busy cities and industrial areas. But since air is 
 
 continually on the move, the pollutants get spread around too.
troposphere
Mount Everest
15°C1000 mb80 km
70 km60 km50 km40 km30 km20 km10 kmjet airlineshighest cloudsupersonic jets
–70°Cnatural ozone layer –45°C–25°C0°C–85°C–1750°C
highest jet aircraft10 mb(mainly charged particles)
           <1mb
mesophere
research balloons
stratosphereionosphereup to 700 km
1mb
100 mb
sea level
 The Earth’ s atmosphere.
 W e cannot live without oxygen.  
So deep-sea divers have to bring some with them … 
The remaining 1% is ...
mainly argon 1 a little carbon dioxide1 a little water vapour1 
 small
 amounts of the other 
noble gases (helium, neon, krypton, and xenon)oxygen
21%
nitrogen
78%oxygen
21%
  … and so do astr onauts.Air And w Ater
210
What is air?

--- Page 212 ---
Q
1 What per centage of air is made up of:
 a
 
nitrogen?
    
b
 
oxygen?
    
c
 
nitrogen 1 oxygen? 
2 About how much mor e nitrogen is there than oxygen in air, 
by volume?
3 What is the combined per centage of all the other gases  
in air?4 Mount Ever est is over 8.8 km high. Climbers carry oxygen 
when attempting to reach its summit. Explain why.
5 Which do you think is the most reactive gas in air? Why? 
6 a  W rite down the name and formula of the black substance 
that forms in the experiment above.
 b
 Suggest a way to tur
n it back into copper. (Page 92!)
 Oxygen enters thr ough your mouth 
and nose, passes into your lungs, and 
from there diffuses into your blood.Oxygen: the gas we need most
Most of the gases in air are essential to us. For example we depend on 
plants for food, and they depend on carbon dioxide. And without nitrogen to dilute the oxygen, fuels would burn too fast for us.
But the gas we depend on most is oxygen. Without it, we would quickly die. 
We need it for the process called respiration, that goes on in all our cells:
 
glucose 1 oxygen  carbon dioxide 1 water 1 energy 
The energy from respiration keeps us warm, and allows us to move, and enables hundreds of different reactions to go on in our bodies. (And note that respiration, in some form, takes place in the cells of all living things, not only humans.)
Measuring the percentage of oxygen in air
The apparatus  A tube of hard glass is connected to two gas syringes A 
and B. The tube is packed with small pieces of copper wire. At the start, syringe A contains 100 cm
3 of air. B is empty.
The method
 These are the steps:
1
  Heat the tube containing copper using a Bunsen burner
. Then push in 
A’s plunger, as shown above. This forces the air into B. When A is 
empty, push in B’s plunger, forcing the air back to A. Repeat several times. As the air is pushed to and fro, the oxygen in it reacts with  the hot copper, turning it black. 
2
  Stop heating the tube after about 3 minutes, and allow the apparatus 
 
to cool. Then push all the gas into one syringe and measure its volume.  (It is now less than 100 cm
3.)
3
  Repeat steps 1 and 2 until the volume of the gas remains steady
. This 
means all the oxygen has been used up. Note the final volume.
The results
 Starting volume
 of air: 100 cm3. Final volume of air: 79 cm3. 
So the volume of oxygen in 100 cm3 air is 21 cm3.
The percentage of oxygen in air is therefore 
  21 ____ 100   3 100 5 21%.
211Air And w Ater
 Fish take in the oxygen dissolved in 
water
, through their gills. 

--- Page 213 ---
15.2Air And w Ater
212
Making use of air
Separating gases from the air
As you saw, air is a mixture of gases. Most of them are useful to us.  
But first, we must separate them from each other. 
How can we separate gases? There is a very clever way. First the air is 
cooled until it turns into a liquid. Then the liquid mixture is separated using a method you met in Chapter 2: fractional distillation.
The fractional distillation of liquid air
This method works because the gases in air have different boiling points.  (Look at the table.) So when liquid air is warmed up, the gases boil at different temperatures, and can be collected one by one.
The steps
 The diagram shows the steps.
1
 Air is pumped into the plant, and filtered to remove dust particles.
2
  Next, water vapour
, carbon dioxide, and pollutants are removed (since 
these would freeze later and block the pipes). Like this:
 
–
 First the air is cooled until the water vapour condenses to water
. 
 
–
  Then it is passed over beds of adsorbent beads to trap the carbon 
dioxide, and any pollutants in it. 
3
  Now the air is forced into a small space, or 
compressed. That makes it 
hot. It is cooled down again by recycling cold air, as the diagram shows.
4
  The cold, compressed air is passed through a jet, into a larger
 space. It 
expands rapidly, and this makes it very cold.
Steps 3 and 4 are repeated several times. The air gets colder each time.  
By 2200
 
°C, it is liquid, except for neon and helium. These gases are 
removed. They can be separated from each other by adsorption on charcoal. 
5
  The liquid air is pumped into the fractionating column. There it is 
slowly warmed up. The gases boil of
f one by one, and are collected in 
tanks or cylinders. Nitrogen boils off first. Why?
!The boiling points of the  
gases in air ( °C)
carbon dioxide    2 32
xenon
 2
108
krypton
 2
153
oxygen
 2
183
argon
 2
186
nitrogen
 2
196
neon
 2
246
helium
 2
269increasing
nitrogenelement
argon
oxygen
krypton
xenon−196 °Cboiling point
−186 °C
−183 °C
−153 °C
−108 °C
liquid air slowly
warmed upliquid air at −200°Cair compressed
and then cooledcarbon dioxide
and
water vapour
removed
air expanded–it gets very coldand after several
cycles it liquiﬁespumpair in
ﬁlter
4
5321
the elements boil
off and their
gases rise up the
column in order
of their boiling
points (lowest
ﬁrst)
 Liquid nitr ogen is used in medical 
research, to keep tissue samples frozen.


--- Page 214 ---
Q
1 In the separation of air into its gases:
 a
 why is the air compr
essed and then expanded?
 b
 why is argon obtained 
before oxygen?
 c
 what do you think is the biggest expense? 
Explain.
2 Give two uses of oxygen gas.3 A mixtur e of oxygen and acetylene burns with a much 
hotter flame than a mixture of air and acetylene. Why?
4 Nitr ogen is used to keep food frozen during transportation. 
Which properties make it suitable for this? 
5 Give thr ee uses for noble gases. (Check page 173  too.)
213Air And w Ater
 An infant in an oxygen tent, to help it br eathe.
Some uses of oxygen
  Planes carry oxygen supplies. So do divers and astronauts.
  In hospitals, patients with breathing problems are given oxygen  
through an oxygen mask, or in an oxygen tent. This is a plastic tent 
that fits over the bed. Oxygen-rich air is pumped into it.
  In steel works, oxygen is used in converting the impure iron from  
the blast furnace into steels. See page 205.
  A mixture of oxygen and the gas acetylene (C2H2) is used as the fuel  
in oxy-acetylene torches for cutting and welding metal. When this  gas mixture burns, the flame can reach 6000
 °C
. Steel melts at around 
3150
 
°C, so the flame cuts through it by melting it.  
Some uses of nitrogen
  Liquid nitrogen is very cold. (It boils at 2196 °C.) So it is used to quick-
freeze food in food factories, and to freeze liquid in cracked pipes before repairing them. It is also used in hospitals to store tissue samples.
  Nitrogen is unreactive. So it is flushed through food packaging to 
remove oxygen and keep the food fresh. (Oxygen helps decay.)
Some uses of the noble gases
The noble gases are unreactive or inert. This leads to many uses. 
  Argon provides the inert atmosphere in ordinary tungsten light bulbs. (In air
, the tungsten filament would quickly burn away.)
  Neon is used in advertising signs because it glows red when a current is passed through it. 
  Helium is used to fill balloons, since it is very light, and safe.
For futher examples of their uses, see page 
173.
 Easy: slicing thr ough steel with an oxy-acetylene flame.
 Fr ozen food on sale. In the frozen-
food factory, food is dipped into liquid nitrogen to quick-freeze it.

--- Page 215 ---
15.3Air And w Ater
214
Pollution alert!
The air: a dump for waste gases
Everyone likes clean fresh air. But every year we pump billions of tonnes 
of harmful gases into the air. Most come from burning fossil fuels.
The fossil fuels
These are coal, petroleum (or crude oil) and natural gas.  Natural gas is mainly methane, CH
4. Coal and petroleum are mixtures  
of many compounds. Most are hydrocarbons – they contain only carbon and hydrogen. But some contain other elements, such as sulfur.
Fossil fuels provide us with energy for heating, and transport, and 
generating electricity. But there is a drawback: burning them produces harmful compounds. Look at the table below.
The main air pollutants
This table shows the main pollutants found in air, and the harm they do:
Pollutant  How is it formed? What harm does it do?
Carbon monoxide, CO 
colourless gas, insoluble, no smellForms when the carbon compounds in fossil fuels burn in too little air.  For example, inside car engines and furnaces.Poisonous even in low concentrations. It reacts with the  haemoglobin in blood, and prevents it from carrying oxygen  around the body – so you die from oxygen starvation.
Sulfur dioxide, SO
2  
an acidic gas with a sharp smellForms when sulfur compounds in  the fossil fuels burn. Power stations are the main source of this pollutant. Irritates the eyes and throat, and causes respiratory (breathing) problems. Dissolves in rain to form acid rain. 
Acid rain attacks stonework in buildings, especially limestone and 
marble – they are calcium carbonate. It lowers the pH in rivers and lakes, killing fish and other river life. It also kills trees and insects.
Nitrogen oxides, NO and NO
2  
acidic gasesForm when the nitrogen and oxygen in air react together, inside hot car engines and hot furnaces.Cause respiratory problems, and dissolve in rain to give acid rain. 
Lead compounds A compound called tetra-ethyl lead used to be added to petrol, to help it burn smoothly in car engines. It is still added in some countries.
On burning, it produces particles of 
other lead compounds.Lead damages children’s brains.  It also damages the kidneys and nervous system in adults.
 Don’ t breathe in!
 Power stations ar e a major source of pollution – 
and especially those that burn coal. It can contain  
a lot of sulfur, and it also forms soot.

--- Page 216 ---
Q
1 Look at the pollutants in the table on page 214. 
 a
 Which come fr
om petrol burned in car engines?
 b
 Which come fr
om air? How and why do these form?
2 Natural gas or methane is a fossil fuel. In a plentiful supply 
of air
, it burns to give carbon dioxide and water.  
Write a balanced equation to show this.3 If methane bur ns in a poor supply of air it will give carbon 
monoxide and water instead. See if you can write a balanced equation to show this.
4 Catalytic converters can r emove carbon monoxide.
 a
 Give a wor
d equation for the reaction that takes place.
 b
 What is the purpose of the transition 
elements?
215Air And w Ater
 Some days the pollution is so bad 
that she has to wear a mask.Reducing air pollution
These are some steps being taken to cut down air pollution. 
  In modern power stations, the waste gas is treated with slaked lime 
(calcium hydroxide). This removes sulfur dioxide by reacting with it  
to give calcium sulfate. The process is called flue gas desulfurisation. See page 241 for more.
  Most countries have now banned lead in petrol. So lead pollution is 
much less of a problem. But it can still arise from plants where lead is extracted, and from battery factories.
  The exhausts of new cars are fitted with catalytic converters, in which 
harmful gases are converted to harmless ones. See below.
Catalytic converters for car exhausts
When petrol burns in a car engine, harmful gases are produced, including:  
 
oxides of nitrogen 
 carbon monoxide, CO
 
 unburnt hydrocarbons from the petrol; these can cause cancer
.
To tackle the problem, modern car exhausts contain a catalytic converter. In this, the harmful gases are adsorbed onto the surface of catalysts, where they react to form harmless gases. The catalysts speed up the reaction. 
The converter usually has two compartments, marked A and B below:
The catalysts are usually the transition elements platinum, palladium, and 
rhodium. They are coated onto a ceramic honeycomb, or ceramic beads, to give a large surface area for adsorbing the harmful gases. The harmless products flow out the exhaust pipe.In A, harmful compounds are reduced. For example:
2NO (g) 
 N2 (g) 1 O2 (g)
The nitrogen and oxygen from 
this reaction then flow into B.
In B, harmful compounds are oxidised, using the oxygen from A. For example:
2CO (g) 1 O
2 (g)  2CO2 (g)
The harmless products then 
flow out the exhaust pipe.catalytic converter exhaust pipeengine
gases from
engine ingases fromengine out
catalyst compartments
catalyst com partments
B A


--- Page 217 ---
15.4Air And w Ater
216
The rusting problem
What is rusting?
This car was once new and shiny. But it has been corroded – broken down 
by reaction with something in the atmosphere. In time, it will all be dust.  
The corrosion of iron and steel has a special name: rusting.  
The red-brown substance that forms is called rust. 
An experiment to investigate rusting
1 Stand three identical nails in three test-tubes.
2
 Now prepare the test-tubes as below
, so that:
 
–
 test-tube 1 contains dry air
 
–
 test-tube 2 contains water but no air
 
–
 test-tube 3 has both air and water
. 
3
 Leave the test-tubes to one side for several days.
Result
 After several days, the
 nails in test-tubes 1 and 2 show no signs of 
rusting. But the nail in test-tube 3 has rust on it. This is because: Rusting requires oxygen and water. 
In fact the iron is oxidised, in this reaction:
 4Fe (
s)
 1
 3O2 (g) 1  4H2O (l)  2Fe2O3.2H2O (s) 
 iron
 1
 oxygen
 1
 water
  hydrated iron(III) oxide (rust)
 Rust forms as flakes. Oxygen and 
moistur
e can get behind them - so in 
time the iron rusts right through.
 A rusting anchor chain. Ir on rusts 
faster in salty water.stopper
dry air
iron nail
calcium
chlorideto dry
the airlayer of oil
to keep outair
boiled water
(no air left
in it)air
unboiled water1 Dry air 2 Boiled water 3 Air and water
!Rusting and salt
 Iron rusts faster in salty water. 
(Salt speeds up the oxidation.)
 So this is a problem for ships … 
	and for cars, where salt is sprinkled on roads in winter, to melt ice. lt helps the cars to rust!
!Stainless steel
Remember, the alloy stainless steel does not rust. But other steels do.

--- Page 218 ---
How to prevent rusting
Iron is the most widely used metal in the world – for everything from  
needles to ships. But rusting destroys things. How can you prevent it?  There are two approaches.
1 C over the iron
The aim is to keep out oxygen and water. You could use:
  p aint. Steel bridges and railings are usually painted. 
 g rease. Tools and machine parts are coated with grease or oil.
  another metal . Iron is coated with zinc, by dipping it into molten 
zinc, for roofing. Steel is electroplated with zinc, for car bodies.  Coating with zinc has a special name: galvanising. For food tins, steel is coated with tin by electroplating.
2 Let another metal c orrode instead
During rusting, iron is oxidised: it loses electrons. Magnesium is more reactive than iron, which means it has a stronger drive to lose electrons.  So when a bar of magnesium is attached to the side of a steel ship, or the leg of an oil rig, it will corrode instead of the iron. Without magnesium:    Fe 
 Fe 2 1 1 2e  2
With magnesium:          Mg  Mg 2 1 1 2e  2
The magnesium dissolves. It has been sacrificed to protect the iron.  This is called sacrificial protection.  The magnesium bar must be replaced before it all dissolves. Note that zinc could also be used for this. See page 191 for more.  
Q
1 What is rusting?
2 Which two substances cause ir on to rust?
3 See if you can think of a way to prove that it is the  
oxygen in air, not nitrogen, that causes rusting.
4 Ir on that is tin-plated does not rust. Why not?5 Y ou have a new bike. Suggest steps you could take to make 
sure it does not rust. Give a reason for each one.
6 a What does the sacrificial protection of iron mean?
 b
 Both magnesium and zinc can be used for it. Why?
 c
 But copper will not work. Explain why
.
217Air And w Ater
 Roofs of galvanised ir on in a Mexican village. It is usually 
called corrugated iron.  They ar e painting the outside of this huge ferry, to help 
prevent rusting. 
 Electr oplating is used to galvanise car 
bodies. The anode is a zinc rod, and the cathode is the steel car body.  

--- Page 219 ---
15.5Air And w Ater
218
Water supply
Everyone needs water 
We all need water. 
  At home  we need it for drinking, cooking, washing things (including 
ourselves) and flushing toilet waste away.
 On farms  it is needed as a drink for animals, and to water crops.
  In industry , they use it as a solvent, and to wash things, and to keep 
hot reaction tanks cool. (Cold-water pipes are coiled around the tanks.)
  In power stations  it is heated to make steam. The steam then drives 
the turbines that generate electricity.
So where does the water come from?
Much of the water we use is taken from rivers. But some is pumped up 
from below ground, where water that has drained down through the soil lies trapped in rocks. 
This underground water is called groundwater. A large area of rock may 
hold a lot of groundwater, like a sponge. This rock is called an aquifer.
Is it clean?
River water is not clean – even if it looks it! It will contain particles of mud, and animal waste, and bits of dead vegetation. But worst of all are the microbes: bacteria and other tiny organisms that can make us ill.
Over 1 billion people around the world have no access to clean water. 
They depend on dirty rivers for their drinking water. And over 2 million people, mainly children, die each year from diarrhoea and diseases such as cholera and typhoid, caused by drinking infected water. 
Providing a water supply on tap
No matter where in the world you are, the steps in providing a clean safe water supply, on tap, are the same:
 In many places, our water supply is 
pumped fr
om rivers. The water is 
cleaned up, the germs are killed, and 
then it is pumped to homes.
pumpwater 
treatment 
plant
rain soaksthrough
aquifer
(water trappedin rock)
water can’t 
soak through this rock
 Using an aquifer as a water supply .
1 Find a clean source – a river or aquifer – to pump water from.
4  Store the water in a clean covered reservoir , ready for pumping to 
taps.3 Add something to kill the microbes in the water. (Usually chlorine.)2 Remove as many solid particles from the water as you can. 
  Y ou could make fine particles stick together and skim them off.
  Y ou could filter the water through clean gravel or sand.  
How well you can clean the water up depends on how dirty it is, and  
what kind of treatment you can afford!
   River water – now safe to drink.

--- Page 220 ---
Q
1 What is:   a  gr oundwater?   b  an aquifer?   c  a micr obe? 
(Check the glossary?)
2 What is a coagulant used for, in water treatment plants?
3 Why is chlorine such an important part of the tr eatment?4 A fluoride compound may be added to water . Why?
5 Some water can be harmful even after tr eatment. Explain.  
6 Y ou need a drink of water – but there is only dirty river 
water. What will you do to clean it?
219Air And w Ater
!
!
!1 screen2      coagulant
water 
pumped in
air
8  reservoir4  sand ﬁlter
6  chlorine
7  ﬂuoride3  ﬂotation tankA modern treatment plant
This diagram shows a modern water treatment plant. Follow the numbers 
to see how particles are removed and microbes killed.
This treatment can remove even the tiniest particles. And chlorine can kill 
all the microbes. But the water may still have harmful substances dissolved in it. For example, nitrates from fertilisers, that can make babies ill.
It is possible to remove dissolved substances, using special membranes. 
But that is very expensive, and is not usually done. The best solution is to find the cleanest source you can, for your water supply. 4 The water is passed thr ough 
a bed of fine sand to filter it. 
5
 It may go thr
ough further 
filters. For example more  
sand, or charcoal to remove 
bad tastes and smells.3
 Next, air is blown thr
ough the 
water in flotation tanks, to make 
the coagulated particles float to the top. They are skimmed off.
8
 The water is pumped to the storage 
r
eservoir, ready for pumping to homes.2
 
A coagulant is added – a 
chemical to make small suspended particles stick together. It could be iron(III) sulfate, for example.
1
 The water is pumped 
 
in. A screen traps any big  particles, such as twigs.6
 Chlorine is added  
to kill the bacteria  
and other micr
obes.
7
 A fluoride compound is 
added in some plants, to  
help fight tooth decay
. 
The test for pure water
If a liquid is pure water, it will also …
 boil at 100 °C, and
 fr eeze at 0 °C.Two tests for water
If a liquid contains water, it will …
 tur n white anhydrous copper(II) 
sulfate blue
 tur n blue cobalt chloride paper 
pink. 
Both colour changes can be reversed 
by heating.
If there is only dirty water to drink …
 Leave it to sit in a container for a while, to let particles settle.
 Scoop out the clear er water from the top of the container, and boil it for several 
minutes to kill the microbes.
 If you ar e not able to boil it, leave it sitting in a clear plastic container in the sun 
for several hours. This will kill most microbes!

--- Page 221 ---
220Air And w Ater
Living in space
The International Space Station 
Right now, about 350 km above you, a large satellite is orbiting the Earth. 
On board are scientists: at least three. They could be asleep as you read this, or listening to music, or taking exercise. But most of the time they are doing experiments.
The satellite is the International Space Station (ISS). It is a floating lab, 
where scientists from different countries carry out a range of experiments. These can be more exciting than usual, since everything is weightless! 
Where do they get their oxygen? 
Inside the space station, the air is like that on the Earth. The main gas  is nitrogen, which does not get used up. But the oxygen does – and the scientists would die without a steady supply. There is no oxygen outside the space station. So where do they get it?
  From the electrolysis of water  A special polymer is used as the  
electrolyte. The overall reaction is:
 
2H2O (l)  2H2(g) 1 O2 (g)
  The scientists breathe the oxygen
. The hydrogen is vented to space. 
  From ‘oxygen candles’  These are a back-up. They contain sodium  
chlorate (NaClO3) mixed with iron powder. When the mixture is lit, the 
sodium chlorate starts breaking down to sodium chloride and oxygen. Some of the oxygen in turn reacts with the iron, giving iron oxide – and this reaction gives out the heat needed to keep the main reaction going.  
  From oxygen cylinders  These are for emergencies only! (It costs too 
much to deliver oxygen cylinders from the Earth.)
The 
carbon dioxide that accumulates in the air is collected, and vented  
to space. (In future it may be kept to grow plants.)
 The Inter national Space Station.  
The ‘wings’ carry solar panels.

 Just 
hanging about in the lab.
 Getting to grips with the pr oject.
!What is the ISS for?  
It is a place to study  the effects of 
low gravity – for example on:
	the human body (and mind)
	how liquids behave
	the rate of chemical reactions
They expect to learn things that will 
be useful on Earth – and on long journeys to other planets.

--- Page 222 ---
221Air And w Ater
What about water?
The scientists would die without water too. So where does the water come 
from, to drink and for electrolyis? Mostly from their own bodies!
All urine is collected. So is the water vapour in the air (from the scientists’ 
breath) and any waste water from washing. It is filtered through many kinds of filter, to remove dissolved substances, and treated to kill bacteria. 
In fact this water ends up much purer than our drinking water down here 
on the Earth! As a back-up, some containers of water are stored on board. 
Note that the scientists use very little water for washing, since it is so 
precious. They usually have a wipe with a damp cloth. 
Keeping the lights on 
The other essential is electricity. Easy! Solar panels on the ‘wings’ of the space station convert sunlight to electricity. Some of this is used to charge batteries, for the hours when the sun is hidden. (The space station orbits the Earth once every 90 minutes, so the scientists enjoy 16 sunrises and sunsets each day!)
The electricity is used for electrolysis, and lighting, and laptops, and music 
players. Cooking does not take much. The food is mostly dried ready-made meals, sent up from the Earth. Add water, and warm in the oven!
A self-contained unit 
This diagram sums up the life support systems, in the space station:
 T ime to grab a snack?
The systems developed for the space station could be very useful one day, if more of us have to move into space!emergency
water
containersemergency
O2 candles
and cylinderselectrolysis
unit
water for
electrolysis
water
treatmentwater vapour
in breath
waste water
from toilet
and washing
clean water
for drinking
and washingcarbon dioxide outelectricity
oxygensolar panelshydrogen out
!What about sleep?
	The scientists sleep in sleeping 
bags – tied to a wall or seat to stop them floating away.
	They wear eye masks to keep the sunlight out.
!Who owns the ISS?
 The ISS is jointly owned by the space agencies of the USA, Russia, Japan, and Canada, and the Eur
opean Space Agency. They all send scientists to it. 
 Other countries may join in befor e the project ends (around 2020 or later).

--- Page 223 ---
Checkup on Chapter 15
Questions
Core curriculum
1 Copy and complete:  
Air is a ............of different gases. 99% of it consists 
of the two elements ......... and .......... . Some of the remaining 1% consists of two compounds, ......... and ......... . The rest is made up of elements called the ......... . These all belong to Group .... of the Periodic Table. The gas we depend on most is ......... This gas combines with glucose in our body cells, releasing energy. The process is called ......... .  This gas is also used in combination with ......... ,  in torches for welding and cutting metal.
2
 Air is a 
mixture of different gases.
 a
 Which gas makes up about 78% of the air?
 b
  Only one gas in the mixture will allow things to burn in it. Which gas is this?
 c
  Which noble gas is present in the greatest
 
quantity, in air? 
 d
 i
  Which gas containing sulfur is a major cause of air pollution?
  
ii
 What harmful ef
fect does this gas have?
 e
  Name two other gases that contribute to air pollution, and say what harm they do.
3
 The rusting of iron 
wool gives a way to find the 
percentage of oxygen in air, using this apparatus: 
 damp iron wool
test tube
beaker of water12 cm
 After five days the water level had risen by 2.5 cm, 
and the iron had rusted to iron(III) oxide. 
 a
  W
rite a balanced equation for the reaction 
between iron wool and oxygen.
 b
  
The iron wool was dampened with water before 
being put in the tube. Why? 
 c
 Why does the water rise up the tube?
 d
  What result does the experiment give, for the percentage of oxygen in air?
 e
  What sort of result would you get if you doubled the amount of iron wool?Revision checklist
Core curriculum
Make sure you can …
 name the gases in clean air , and give the 
percentages for the two main gases present
 explain why oxygen is so important to us
 describe an experiment to find the % of oxygen  in 
air
 name the fossil fuels and give examples of their use  
as fuels
 – name four common pollutants in air
 –
 give the source, for each
 –
 describe the harm they do
 explain what rusting is
 say which substances must be present for rusting to occur
 describe an experiment to investigate the conditions
 needed for rusting
 give examples of ways to prevent rusting, by  
keeping oxygen and moisture away
 give examples of how we use water in homes, on   
farms, in industry
, and in power stations
 describe the steps in the treatment of water , to give 
a clean safe water supply
Extended curriculum
Make sure you can also …
 describe the separation of gases from the air , using  
 
fractional distillation
 list the harmful gases produced in car engines 
 – explain what catalytic converters are 
 
–
 name the metals they usually use as catalysts
 
–
  explain how nitrogen oxides and carbon
 
monoxide are converted to harmless gases in themAir And w Ater
222


--- Page 224 ---
4 Oxygen and nitrogen, the two main gases in air , are 
both slightly soluble in water. A sample of water 
was boiled, and the gases collected. The water vapour was allowed to condense and the remaining gases were measured. In a 50 cm
3 sample of these 
gases, 18 cm3 were oxygen.
 a
 i
 What % of the dissolved air was oxygen?
  
ii
  How does this compare to the % of oxygen in the atmosphere? 
 b
 About what % of atmospheric air is nitrogen?
 c
  Which gas, 
nitrogen or oxygen, is more soluble 
in water?
5
 This diagram shows one stage in the treatment of water to make it ready for piping to homes: 
 stones
water outsandwater in (to be cleaned)
 a Name the process being carried out here. 
 b
  The water entering this stage has already been treated with a 
coagulant, aluminium sulfate. 
What does a coagulant do?
 c
  Which kinds of impurities will the above process:
   
i
 remove?
   
ii
 fail to remove?
 d
 The next stage in treatment is 
chlorination.
  
i
 What does this term mean? 
  
ii
 Why is this process carried out? 
 e
  In some places the water is too acidic to be piped to homes. What could be added to reduce the acidity level?
 f
  At the end of treatment, another element may be added to water
, for dental reasons, in the form 
of a salt. Which element is this? 
Extended curriculum
6 Nitrogen and oxygen are separated from air by fractional distillation. Oxygen boils at 
2183
 
°C and 
nitrogen at 2196
 
°C.
 a
 W
rite the chemical formulae of these two gases.
 b
  What state must the air be in, before fractional 
   
distillation can be carried out?
 c
  V
ery low temperatures are required for b.  
How are these achieved?
 d
  Explain, using their boiling points, how the nitrogen and oxygen are separated.
 e
 Name one other gas obtained in the process
.7
 Modern cars are fitted with catalytic converters.
  
An outline of one is shown below:
 catalysts: rhodium,
platinum, palladium
IN OUT
oxides of nitrogen,
carbon monoxide,
unburnt hydrocarbonsless harmful gases
to the atmosphere
 a  i   Where in the car is the catalytic converter?
  
ii
 What is the purpose of a catalytic converter?
  
iii
  Which type of elements are rhodium, 
platinum, and palladium?
 b
 Look at the gases that enter the converter
.
  
i
  How and where are the oxides of nitrogen
 
formed?
 
  ii
  Where do the unburnt hydrocarbons come
 
from?
 c
  The gases below enter the catalytic converter
. 
Name substances i – iv, to show what the gases are converted into.
  gases in converted to
oxides of nitrogen i 
carbon monoxide ii 
unburnt hydrocarbons iii 
and iv 
8 In the catalytic converters fitted to modern cars, carbon monoxide and oxides of nitrogen in the exhaust gas are converted to other substances. 
 a
 i
 Why is carbon monoxide removed?
  
ii
 Give one harmful ef
fect of nitrogen dioxide. 
 b
 What is meant by a 
catalytic reaction?
 c
  In one reaction in a catalytic converter
, nitrogen 
monoxide (NO) reacts with carbon monoxide to form nitrogen and carbon dioxide. Write a balanced equation for this reaction.
9
 Underwater steel pipelines need to be protected
 
from corrosion. One method is to attach a block of a second metal to the pipeline.
 a
 i
  What is the key factor in choosing the second
 
metal? 
  
ii
 Name a suitable metal.
  
iii
  W
rite a half-equation to show what happens 
   
to this metal when it is attached to the pipeline.
 b
 What name is given to this type of protection?Air And w Ater
223

--- Page 225 ---
16.1
Hydrogen: the lightest element
Hydrogen is the lightest of all the elements. It is so light that there is none 
in the air: it has escaped from the Earth’s atmosphere. 
But out in space, it is the most common element in the universe. Inside 
the sun, hydrogen atoms fuse to form helium atoms. The energy given out provides the Earth with heat and light. We could not live without it.
Making hydrogen in the lab
Hydrogen is made in the lab by using a metal to drive it out or displace it from dilute acid. Zinc and dilute sulfuric acid are the usual choice. 
The apparatus is shown on the right, below. The reaction is:
 Zn (
s)
 1
 H2SO4 (aq)   ZnSO4 (aq)  1  H2 (g)
 
zinc
  dilute
  zinc
  hydrogen
  
 sulfuric acid
  sulfate
The properties of hydrogen
1 It is the lightest of all gases – about 20 times lighter than air .
2
 It is colourless, with no smell.
3
  It combines with oxygen to form water
.  
A mixture of the two gases will explode when lit. The reaction is:
  
2H2 (g) 1  O2 (g)  2H2O (l)
 It gives out so much energy that it is used to fuel space rockets.
 
 The same overall reaction takes place in hydrogen fuel cells, without 
 
 burning, and gives energy in the form of electricity (page 121).
4
 Hydrogen is more reactive than copper
, as you can see from the panel. 
 
 So it will take oxygen from copper(II) oxide, reducing it to copper
. 
 The hydrogen is itself oxidised:
  CuO (
s)
 1
 
H2 (g)  Cu ( s)  1  H2O (l)
Nitrogen
Nitrogen is a colourless, odourless, unreactive gas, that makes up nearly 
80% of the air. You breathe it in – and breathe it out again, unchanged. 
But you also take in nitrogen in the proteins in your food. Your body uses 
these to build muscle, bone, skin, hair, blood, and other tissues. In fact you are nearly 3% nitrogen, by mass!
The properties of nitrogen
1 It is a colourless gas, with no smell.
2
 It is only slightly soluble in water
.
3
 It is very unreactive compared with oxygen.
4
  But it will react with hydrogen to form ammonia:
  
N2 ( g) 1  3H2 ( g)  2NH3 ( g)
 This reversible reaction is the first step in making nitric acid, and 
 
 nitrogen fertilisers. There is more about it in the next unit. Sunshine, thanks to hydr ogen!
 One way to make hydr ogen in the lab.
watergas jarhydrogendilute
sulfuric
acid
zinc
!The hydrogen displacers
potassium
sodiumcalciummagnesiumaluminiumzincironleadhydrogencoppersilvergold
increasing 
reactivity
metals above hydrogen 
in the reactivity series
can displace it  
from acidsSome non-metal S and their compound S
224
Hydrogen, nitrogen, and ammonia

--- Page 226 ---
 The fountain experiment. The flask 
contains ammonia. It dissolves in the 
first drops of water that reach the top of the tube, so a fountain of water rushes up to fill the vacuum. (Any very soluble gas will show this effect.)
5  Nitrogen also combines with oxygen at high temperatures to form 
oxides:
 nitrogen monoxide (NO) and nitrogen dioxide (NO2). 
  The reactions occur naturally in the air during lightning – and also 
 
inside hot car engines, and power station furnaces. The nitrogen oxides  are acidic, and cause air pollution, and acid rain. (See page 214.)
Ammonia
Ammonia is a gas with the formula NH3. It is a very important compound, 
because it is used to make fertilisers. It is made in industry by reacting nitrogen with hydrogen. The details are in the next unit.
Making ammonia in the lab  
You can make ammonia in the lab by heating any ammonium compound with a strong base. The base displaces ammonia from the compound.  For example:
 
2NH4Cl (s)  1  Ca(OH)2 (s)  CaCl2 (s) 1  2H2O (l) 1  2NH3 (g)
 
ammonium
  calcium
  calcium
  water
  
ammonia
 chloride
  
hydroxide
  chloride
This reaction can be used as a test for ammonium compounds. If an unknown compound gives of
f ammonia when heated with a strong base,  
it must be an ammonium compound. 
The properties of ammonia
1 It is a colourless gas with a strong, choking smell.
2
 It is less dense than air
.
3
  It reacts with hydrogen chloride gas to form a white smoke. 
 
The smoke is made of tiny particles of solid ammonium chloride:
 
NH3 (g) 1  HCl (g)   NH4Cl (s)
 This reaction can be used to test whether a gas is ammonia.
4
 It is very soluble in water
. (It shows the fountain effect.)
5
 The solution in water is alkaline – it turns red litmus blue. 
6
 Since ammonia solution is alkaline, it reacts with acids to form salts. 
 For example with nitric acid it forms ammonium nitrate:
 
NH3 (aq)  1  HNO3 (aq)   NH4NO3 (aq)
Q
1 Hydr ogen can be made using zinc and dilute sulfuric acid. 
See if you can suggest a different metal and acid, for 
making it. (Use the reactivity series?) 
2 a Hydr ogen is able to react with copper(II) oxide. Why?
 b
 Which type of r
eaction is this?3 Which is mor e reactive, nitrogen or oxygen? 
4 T wo examples of displacement reactions have been given in 
this unit. What is a displacement reaction?
5 W rite a word equation for the reaction of powdered sodium 
hydroxide with ammonium sulfate.
225Some non-metal S and their compound S

--- Page 227 ---
16.2
pump
2 Compressor
1  Gases
mixed andscrubbed3  Converter
4  Cooler
Liquid ammoniapump
5  Storage tanks200
atmospheres
450°C
N
2, H2, NH3N2, H2
N2, H2
N2 H2beds ofcatalyst
pump
1  The reactants are nitrogen and hydrogen. The nitrogen is obtained 
from air, and the hydrogen by reacting natural gas (methane) with 
steam, or by cracking hydrocarbons. See the details on the right.
  The two gases are mixed, and 
scrubbed (cleaned) to remove 
impurities. 
2
  The gas mixture is 
compressed. More and more gas is pumped in, 
until the pressure reaches 200 atmospheres.
3
  The compressed gas flows to the 
converter – a round tank with beds of 
hot iron at 450
 °C. The iron catalyses the reversible reaction:
  
N2 (g) 1 3H2 (g)  2NH3 (g)
 But only 15% of the mixture leaving the converter is ammonia.
4
 The mixture is cooled until the ammonia condenses to a liquid. 
  The nitrogen and hydrogen are recycled to the converter for another chance to react. Steps 
3 and 4 are continually repeated.
5
 The ammonia is run into tanks, and stored as a liquid under pressure. Ammonia plants ar e often built close 
to oil refineries, to make use of the 
hydrogen from cracking.
!Obtaining the reactants
Nitrogen
Air is nearly 80% nitrogen, and 20% oxygen. The oxygen is removed by burning hydrogen:
2H
2 (g) 1  O2 (g)  2H2O (l)
That leaves mainly nitrogen, and a 
small amount of other gases.
Hydrogen
 It is usually made by reacting 
natural gas (methane) with steam:
 CH4 (g) 1  2H2O (g)  
 CO2 (g) 1  4H2 (g)
 It can also be made by cracking 
hydrocarbons from petroleum. For example:
 C2H6 (g)  C2H4 (g) 1 H2 (g)catalyst
catalyst
ethane etheneSome non-metal S and their compound S
226
Making ammonia in industry
It’s a key chemical
Ammonia is a very important chemical, because it is needed to make 
fertilisers – and we depend on fertilisers to grow enough food.It is made from nitrogen and hydrogen. The reaction is reversible.
The Haber process
The process used to make ammonia is called the Haber process.

--- Page 228 ---
Improving the yield of ammonia
The reaction between nitrogen and hydrogen is reversible,  
and the forward reaction is exothermic: it gives out heat.
 N2 (g) 1  3H2 (g)   2NH3 (g)
Since the reaction is reversible, a mixture of the two gases  will never react completely. The yield will never be 100%.
But the yield can be improved by changing the reaction 
conditions, to shift equilibrium towards the product.
The graph on the right shows how the yield changes with 
temperature and pressure. 
The chosen conditions
The temperature and pressure  As you can see, the highest 
yield on the graph is at 
X, at 350
 °C and 400 atmospheres.
But the Haber process uses 450
 °C and 200 atmospheres, at 
Y on the 
graph. Why? Because at 350
 °C, the reaction is too slow
. 450
 °C gives 
a
 better rate. 
And second, a pressure of 400 atmospheres needs very powerful pumps, and very strong and sturdy pipes and tanks, and a lot of electricity.  200 atmospheres is safer, and saves money.
So the conditions inside the converter do not give a high yield. But then 
the ammonia is removed, so that more will form. And the unreacted gases are recycled, for another chance to react. So the final yield is high.
The catalyst
 Iron speeds up the reaction. But it does not change the yield!
More about the raw materials
The panel on the opposite page shows how the raw materials are obtained. 
Air and water are easy to find. But you need natural gas (methane), or hydrocarbons from petroleum (crude oil), to make hydrogen. 
So ammonia plants are usually built close to natural gas terminals or 
petroleum refineries. In fact many petroleum and gas companies now make ammonia, as a way to increase their profits.exothermic
endothermic70
6050403020
10
0
0     50   100  150  200  250  300   350   400
Pressur e/atmospheresYield of ammonia /%350°C
550°C500°C450°C400°CThe yield of ammonia at different temperatures and pressures
X
Y
Q
1 Ammonia is made fr om nitrogen and hydrogen.
 a
 How ar
e the nitrogen and hydrogen obtained?
 b
 What is the pr
ocess for making ammonia called?
 c
 W
rite an equation for the reaction.
2 Look at the catalyst beds in the diagram on page 226.  
a
 What is in them? 
 b
 Why ar
e they arranged this way?3 a  Explain why high pressure and low temperature help the 
yield, in making ammonia. (Check Unit 9.6?)
 b
  400 atmospher
es and 250
 °C would give a high yield. 
Why ar
e these conditions not used in the Haber process?
 c
  What is the % yield of ammonia at 200 atmospher
es and 
450
 °C? (Use the graph.) 
 d
 What happens to the unr
eacted gases?
!Making ammonia: a summary
 N2 1 3H2    2NH3
  4 molecules  2 molecules
To improve the yield:
 quite high pressure 
 remove ammonia 
To get a decent reaction rate:
 moderate temperature
 use a catalystexothermic
endothermic
227Some non-metal S and their compound S

--- Page 229 ---
16.3
What plants need
A plant needs carbon dioxide, light, and water. It also needs several 
different elements. The main ones are nitrogen, potassium, and phosphorus.
Plants need nitrogen for making 
chlorophyll, and proteins.
 Getting r eady to apply fertiliser  
to fields. (Sometimes spelled fertilizer!)Potassium helps them to produce proteins, and to resist disease.Phosphorus helps roots to grow, and crops to ripen.
 Nutrition for plants: these granules 
are made of animal manure, a natural 
fertiliser.
Plants obtain these elements from compounds in the soil, which they take 
in through their roots as solutions. The most important one is nitrogen. Plants take it in as nitrate ions and ammonium ions.
Fertilisers
Every crop a farmer grows takes compounds from the soil. Some get replaced naturally. But in the end the soil gets worn out. New crops will not grow well. So the farmer has to add fertilisers.
A fertiliser is any substance added to the soil to make it more fertile. Animal manure is a natural fertiliser. Synthetic fertilisers are made in 
factories, and sprinkled or sprayed on fields. Here are some examples. 
ammonium nitrate, NH
4NO3 ammonium sulfate, (NH4)2SO4
potassium sulfate, K2SO4 ammonium phosphate, (NH4)3PO4Some non-metal S and their compound S
228
Fertilisers

--- Page 230 ---
Examples of reactions to make synthetic fertilisers
1  Ammonia reacts with nitric acid to give ammonium nitrate. 
This
 fertiliser is an excellent source of nitrogen:
 
NH3 (aq)   HNO3 (aq)   NH4NO3 (aq)
 ammonia
  nitric acid
  ammonium nitrate
2
 Ammonia reacts with sulfuric acid to give ammonium sulfate:
 
2NH3 (aq)   H2SO4 (aq)   (NH4)2SO4 (aq)
 ammonia
  sulfuric acid
  ammonium sulfate
It’s not all good news
Fertilisers help to feed the world. We could not grow enough crops without them. But there are drawbacks – as usual!
In the river
 Fertilisers can seep into rivers from farmland. In the river
, 
they help tiny water plants called algae to grow. These can cover the water 
like a carpet. When they die, bacteria feed on them, at the same time using up the oxygen dissolved in the water. So fish suffocate.
In the water supply
 From rivers, the nitrate ions from fertilisers can 
end up in our water supply
. They are converted to nitrite ions in our 
bodies. These combine with haemoglobin in blood, in place of oxygen,  
so the blood carries less oxygen around the body. This can cause illness, especially in infants. Their skin may take on a blue tinge.
So farmers should use fertilisers carefully. They should try to keep them  
away from river banks – and not spread them in wet weather.
!What % of it is nitrogen?
Ammonium nitrate is rich in 
nitrogen. What % of it is nitrogen? Find out like this:
Formula: NH
4NO3
Ar :  N 5 14, H 5 1, O 5 16
Mr : (14 3 2) 1 (4 3 1 ) 1 (16 3 3)
 5
 80
% of this that is nitrogen
 5
 
  28 ___ 80   3 100%
 5
 35%
Q
1  Y ou can buy a mixture of fertilisers called NPK fertiliser. 
It contains elements plants need. Why do you think it 
 is called 
NPK
 ?
2 Nitrogenous fertilisers are fertilisers that contain nitrogen. 
Name three nitrogenous fertilisers.
3 Fertilisers can harm river life. Explain how .4 The box in the margin  above will remind you how to work 
out % composition.
 a
 Find the % of nitr
ogen in ammonium sulfate. ( Ar : S 5 32)
 b
  Which would pr
ovide more nitrogen: 1 kg of ammonium 
nitrate or 1 kg of ammonium sulfate?
 c
 Make sur
e not to add it in the rainy season. Why not? Synthetic fertilisers ar e made by 
reactions like those below. Then the 
solutions are evaporated to give solids. This shows fertiliser in storage.
 Paddling thr ough the algae. Fertiliser 
from farms helps these plants to grow.
229Some non-metal S and their compound S

--- Page 231 ---
16.4
 A molecule of sulfur . It has 8 atoms – 
so the molecular formula of sulfur is S8. 
But it is just called S in equations.
 This is a crystal of rhombic sulfur, 
the allotrope that is stable at room 
temperature.
 If you heat rhombic sulfur slowly to 
above 96
 °C, the molecules r
earrange 
themselves. The result is needle-shaped crystals of monoclinic sulfur.
Some non-metal S and their compound S
230
Sulfur and sulfur dioxide
Where is sulfur found?
Sulfur is a non-metal. It is quite a common element in the Earth’s crust. 
  It is found, as the element, in large underground beds in several 
countries, including Mexico, Poland and the USA. It is also found 
around the rims of volcanoes. 
  It occurs as a compound in many metal ores. For example in the lead ore 
galena, which is lead(II) sulfide, PbS.
  Sulfur compounds also occur naturally in the fossil fuels: coal, petroleum (crude oil) and natural gas. 
Extracting the sulfur
From oil and gas  Most sulfur is now obtained from the sulfur 
compounds found in petroleum and natural gas. These compounds are removed to help reduce air pollution.
For example natural gas is mainly methane. But it can have as much as 
30% 
hydrogen sulfide. This is separated from the methane. Then it is 
reacted with oxygen, with the help of a catalyst, to give sulfur: 
 
2H2S (g)  1  O2 (g)  2S ( s)  1  2H2O (l)
 hydrogen sulfide
 1
 oxygen
  sulfur  1  water
From sulfur beds
 About 5% of the sulfur we use comes from the 
underground sulfur beds. Superheated water is pumped down to melt the sulfur and carry it to the surface. (It melts at 115
 °C.)
The properties of sulfur
1 It is a brittle yellow solid.
3
 It has two dif
ferent forms or allotropes, as shown on the right.
4
 Because it is molecular
, it has quite a low melting point. 
5
 Like other non-metals, it does not conduct electricity
.
6
 Like most non-metals, it is insoluble in water
.
7
  It reacts with metals to form sulfides. For example with iron it forms iron(II) sulfide:
  Fe (
s) 1 S (s)  FeS (s) 
 Y
ou can see photos of this reaction on page 46.
8
 It burns in oxygen to form sulfur dioxide:
  S (
s) 1 O2 (g)  SO2 (g)
Uses of sulfur
  Most sulfur is used to make sulfuric acid.
 It is added to rubber, for example for car tyres, to toughen it.  
 
This is called vulcanizing the rubber.
 It is used in making drugs, pesticides, dyes, matches, and paper.
  It is used in making cosmetics, shampoos, and body lotions.
  It is added to cement to make sulfur concrete. This is not attacked by
 acid. So it is used for walls and floors in factories that use acid.

--- Page 232 ---
 Death by sulfur dioxide : this forest was killed by acid rain. Sulfur dioxide is used to pr eserve 
dried fruit (like these apricots) and other 
foods. (Sulfur is often spelled sulphur.)
Sulfur dioxide
Sulfur dioxide (SO2) is a gas. It forms when sulfur burns in air. 
1
 It is a colourless gas, heavier than air
, with a strong, choking smell.
2
  Like most non-metal oxides, it is an acidic oxide. It dissolves in water
, 
forming sulfurous acid, H2SO3:
  
H2O (l) 1  SO2 (g)  H2SO3 (aq)
 This breaks down easily again to sulfur dioxide and water
.
3
  It acts as a bleach when it is damp or in solution. This is because it 
removes the colour from coloured compounds by 
reducing them.
4
 It can kill bacteria.
Sulfur dioxide as a pollutant
Coal and petroleum contain sulfur compounds – even after petroleum is treated to remove them. Some coals contain a high % of sulfur.
When these fuels are burned in power stations, and factory furnaces,  
the sulfur compounds are oxidised to sulfur dioxide. 
This escapes into the air, where it can cause a great deal of harm. It can 
attack your lungs, giving breathing problems. It also dissolves in rain to give acid rain. This attacks buildings and metal structures, and can kill fish and plants. (See page 214.)
Uses of sulfur dioxide
  Its main use is in the manufacture of sulfuric acid.
  It is used to bleach wool, silk, and wood pulp for making paper .
  It is used as a sterilizing agent in making soft drinks and jam, and in drying fruit. It stops the growth of bacteria and moulds.
Q
1 Name thr ee sources of sulfur in the Earth’s crust.
2 Sulfur has quite a low melting point. Why is this?
3 Sulfur has two allotropes. What does that mean?
4 Sulfur r eacts with iron to form iron(II) sulfide.
 Is this a r
edox reaction? Explain your answer.5 a Sulfur dioxide is an acidic oxide. Explain.
 b
  What pr
oblems does this property cause, if sulfur dioxide 
escapes into the air from power stations? 
6 Sulfur dioxide is a heavy gas. Do you think this contributes 
to air pollution? Explain your answer
.
 The ef fect of acid rain on a limestone statue.
231Some non-metal S and their compound S

--- Page 233 ---
16.5
 No swimming! A lake of natural 
sulfuric acid, in a volcano in Indonesia. 
 Y ou will see this sign on tanks of 
sulfuric acid. What is the message?
!Pressure in the Contact  
process
In step 3:
 2SO2 1 O2    2SO3
 3 molecules  2 molecules
 So incr easing the pressure will 
increase the yield of sulfur 
trioxide. (Page 127 explains why.)
 But in practice, the pressure is increased only a little (to less than two atmospheres).Some non-metal
S
 and their compound
S
232
Sulfuric acid
Making sulfuric acid by the Contact process
More sulfuric acid is made than any other chemical! Most of it is made  
by the Contact process. The raw materials are:
  sulfur , air, and water … or
  sulfur dioxide, air , and water.  
The sulfur dioxide is obtained when sulfide ores, such as lead and  zinc ores, are roasted in air to extract the metal from them. 
Starting with sulfur, the steps in the Contact process are:
sulfur
thick fuming liquid called oleumsulfur dioxide, SO2
S (s) 1 O2 (g)  SO2 (g)
sulfur trioxide, SO3
2SO2 (g) 1 O2 (g)  2SO3 (g)
concentrated sulfuric acid, H2SO4
H2O (l) 1 SO3 (g)  H2SO4 (l )1
 burned in 
air
2
 mixed with more air
3
  
passed over four separate beds of catalyst (pellets of vanadium(V) oxide) at 450
 °C
4
  dissolved in concentrated sulfuric acid
5
 mixed carefully with water
Things to note about the Contact process
  The reaction in step 3 is reversible. The sulfur trioxide continually 
breaks down again. So the mixture is passed over four separate beds  of catalyst, to give the reactants further chances to react.
  Sulfur trioxide is removed between the last two beds of catalyst (using step 
4) in order to increase the yield.
  The reaction in step 3 is exothermic. So yield rises as temperature 
falls. But the catalyst will not work below 400
 °C, and it works better 
 
at higher temperatures. So 450
 °C is a compromise.
  T o keep the temperature down to 450  °C, heat must be removed from 
the catalyst beds. So pipes of cold water are coiled 
around them to 
carry heat away. The heat makes the water boil. The steam is used to generate electricity for the plant, or for heating buildings.
  In step 4, the sulfur trioxide is dissolved in concentrated acid instead 
of water, because with water, a thick, dangerous mist of acid forms.

--- Page 234 ---
 Concentrated sulfuric acid was added  
to two teaspoons of sugar – and this is 
the result. It turned the sugar into carbon. Think what it could do to flesh!
 The teacher's sulfate. The white stick 
they call chalk is not r
eally chalk – it is 
calcium sulfate.  
Q
Unit 9.6 will help you answer these questions.
1 For making sulfuric acid, name:
 a
 the pr
ocess
 b
 the raw materials
 c
 the catalyst
2 a  The r eaction between sulfur dioxide and oxygen is 
reversible. What does that mean?
 b
 Suggest a r
eason why a catalyst is needed.
 c
  At 500
 °C, the catalyst makes sulfur trioxide form even 
faster
. Why is this temperature not used?3 Explain how t hese help to increase the yield of sulfur 
trioxide, in the Contact process:
 a
 Several beds of catalyst ar
e used.
 b
 The sulfur trioxide is r
emoved by dissolving it.
4 Identify two oxidation reactions in the manufacture of 
sulfuric acid.
5 a  W rite word equations for the reactions of zinc metal,  
zinc oxide (ZnO) and zinc carbonate (ZnCO3) with dilute 
sulfuric acid.
 b
 Now write a balanced equation for each r
eaction in a.
!Concentrated sulfuric acid – danger!
 Concentrated sulfuric acid is a dehydrating agent. It removes water.
 It ‘likes’ water so much that it r emoves hydrogen and oxygen atoms from other 
substances. For example from sugar (sucrose, C12H22O11), leaving just carbon.  
Look at the photo above. 
 When it is mixed with water , the reaction gives out a great deal of heat.
233Some non-metal S and their compound S
Uses of sulfuric acid
Sulfuric acid is one of the world’s most important chemicals. It has 
thousands of uses in industry. Its main uses are in making: 
  fertilisers such as ammonium sulfate
  paints, pigments, and dyestuf fs
  fibres and plastics
  soaps and detergents.
It is also the acid used in car batteries.
Dilute sulfuric acid
In the lab, dilute sulfuric acid is made by adding the concentrated acid to water. And never the other way round – because so much heat is produced that the acid could splash out and burn you.
Dilute sulfuric acid shows the usual reactions of acids:1
 acid 
1 metal  salt 1 hydrogen
2
 acid 
1 metal oxide or hydroxide  salt 1 water
3
 acid 
1 carbonate  salt 1 water 1 carbon dioxide
Its salts are called sulfates. And reactions 2 and 3 are neutralisations: 
water is produced as well as a salt. 
For example dilute sulfuric acid reacts with iron like this:
 H2SO4 (aq)  1  Fe (s)   FeSO4 (aq)  1  H2 (g)
 sulfuric acid
  iron
  iron(II) sulfate
 hydrogen
And with copper(II) oxide like this:
 H2SO4 (aq)  1  CuO (s)   CuSO4 (aq)  1  H2O (l)
 sulfuric acid
  copper(II) oxide
  copper(II) sulfate
 water

--- Page 235 ---
16.6
Carbon, the element
Some carbon is found in the Earth’s crust as the free element, in two 
forms: diamond and graphite. Diamond is a hard, clear solid. Graphite  is a dark, greasy solid. So diamond and graphite are allotropes (different forms of the same element).
Carbon compounds
There are thousands of carbon compounds in nature: in living things, in the soil, in the oceans, and in the atmosphere (carbon dioxide). You are around 75% water by mass – and around 20% carbon! 
The carbon cycle
Carbon moves between compounds in the atmosphere, living things, the soil, and the ocean, in a non-stop journey called the carbon cycle: Char coal: a form of graphite made 
by heating coal or wood in a little air.
carbon dioxide in the oceancarbon dioxide in the air
respiration in all living thingsburning fuel
produces
carbon dioxidephotosynthesis by
green plants on landand phytoplanktonin the ocean
carbon compounds in the fossil fuels (coal, petroleum, natural gas)carbon
compounds
in animals
death and decaydissolved
in ocean
feedingbacteria
feed on
dead animals
and plantscarbon
compounds
in plants
Note about the carbon cycle
  Carbon moves between the atmosphere, ocean, and living things, in the
 form of carbon dioxide.
  Carbon dioxide is … 
 –
  removed from the atmosphere by 
photosynthesis, and dissolving 
in the ocean
 –
  added to it by 
respiration, and the combustion (burning) of fuels 
that contain carbon.
!Two opposite reactions
Respiration, which goes on in 
your body, is the opposite of photosynthesis in plant leaves. You can compare their equations on the next page.Some non-metal
S
 and their compound
S
234
Carbon and the carbon cycle

--- Page 236 ---
 Respiration plus skill … Rice plants: busy with photosynthesis. 
They will convert the glucose to star
ch. 
Removing carbon dioxide from the atmosphere
  By photosynthesis  In this process, carbon dioxide and water react in 
plant leaves, to give glucose and oxygen. Chlorophyll, a green pigment 
in leaves, is a catalyst for the reaction. Sunlight provides the energy:
 
6CO2 (g) 1  6H2O (l)  C6H12O6 (s) 1  6O2 (g)
 carbon dioxide
  water
  glucose
  
oxygen
  The plant uses the glucose to make the other carbon compounds it needs. Then animals eat the plants. So the carbon compounds get passed along the food chain. Many of them end up in your dinner!
  Note that photosynthesis also goes on in 
phytoplankton, tiny plants 
that float in the ocean. These are eaten by fish and other organisms.  So carbon is passed along food chains in the ocean too.
  By dissolving  Some carbon dioxide from the air dissolves in the 
ocean. It provides carbonate ions, which shellfish use along with calcium ions from the water
, to build their shells. (Shells are made of 
calcium carbonate.) Fish also use them in building their skeletons.
  But only a certain % of carbon dioxide will dissolve. A balance is reached between its concentration in the air and the ocean.
Adding carbon dioxide to the atmosphere
  By respiration  This is the process that takes place in our cells (and in 
the cells of plants and other animals) to provide energy:
 
C6H12O6 (aq)  1  6O2 (g)  6CO2 (g) 1  6H2O (l) 1  energy
 
glucose
 1
 oxygen
  carbon dioxide  1  water  1  energy
  W
e get the glucose from food. The energy keeps us warm, and allows 
us to move, and enables other reactions to go on in our bodies.
 By the combustion of fuels  Natural gas or methane burns like this:
 
CH4 (g) 1  2O2 (g)  CO2 (g) 1  2H2O (l) 1  energy
 methane
 1
 oxygen
  carbon dioxide  1  water  1  energy
The carbon cycle and fossil fuels
In the ocean, the remains of dead organisms fall to the ocean floor, and are buried. Over millions of years their soft parts turn into petroleum (oil) and natural gas. (Hard shells turn into limestone rock.)
Meanwhile, trees and other vegetation get buried in warm swamps.  
Over millions of years, they turn into coal.
In this way, carbon dioxide from the air ends up in the fossil fuels.  
And when we burn these, it is released again.light
chlorophyll
Q
1 What is the carbon cycle?
2 Compar e respiration and the combustion of methane.
 a
 What is similar about the two r
eactions?
 b
 What do we use the energy fr
om respiration for?
 c
 What do we use the energy fr
om burning fuels for?
3 Now compar e respiration and photosynthesis.
 What do you notice about these r
eactions?4 See if you can draw a cir cular flowchart that shows:
 –
  how carbon dioxide fr
om the air gets locked up as 
compounds in petroleum and natural gas
 
–
 and how it is r
eleased again, millions of years later.
5 One part of the carbon cycle does not occur naturally 
(that is, without help from humans). Which part? 
6 What part do you play in the carbon cycle?
235Some non-metal S and their compound S

--- Page 237 ---
16.7
Carbon dioxide
The gas carbon dioxide (CO2) occurs naturally in air. It is also a product  
in these three reactions:
1
  The combustion of carbon compounds in plenty of air
. For example, 
when natural gas (methane) burns in plenty of air, the reaction is:
 
CH4 (g) 1  2O2 (g)  CO2 (g) 1  2H2O (l)
2
 The reaction between glucose and oxygen, in your body cells:
 
C6H12O6 (aq)  1  6O2 (g)  6CO2 (g) 1  6H2O (l)
 This is called 
respiration. You breathe out the carbon dioxide.
3
  The reaction between dilute acids and carbonates. For example 
between
 hydrochloric acid and marble chips (calcium carbonate):
 
CaCO3 (s) 1  2HCl ( aq)   CaCl2 (aq)  1  CO2 (g) 1  H2O (l)
Properties of carbon dioxide
1 It is a colourless gas, with no smell.
2
 It is much heavier than air
.
3
 Things will not burn in it. W
e say it does not support combustion. 
4
 It is slightly soluble in water
, forming carbonic acid, H2CO3.
Carbon monoxide
Carbon monoxide (CO) forms when carbon compounds burn in too little oxygen. For example, when methane burns in insufficient oxygen: 
 
2CH4 (g) 1  3O2 (g)  2CO ( g)  1  4H2O (l)
It is a deadly poisonous gas. It binds to the haemoglobin in red blood cells, and prevents it from carrying oxygen around the body. So victims die from oxygen starvation.
Carbon monoxide has no smell, which makes it hard to detect. So it is 
important to have gas heaters and boilers checked regularly, to make sure the air supply is not blocked by soot. 
Carbonates
Carbonates are compounds that contain the carbonate ion, CO3   2
 2. 
One example is calcium carbonate, CaCO3, which occurs naturally as 
limestone, chalk and marble. These are the main properties of carbonates:
1
  They are insoluble in water – 
except for sodium, potassium, and 
ammonium carbonates, which are soluble.
2
 They react with acids to form a salt, water
, and carbon dioxide.
3
 Most of them break down on heating, to an oxide and carbon dioxide: 
 
CaCO3 (s)  CaO ( s)  1  CO2 (g)
 calcium carbonate
  calcium oxide
  carbon dioxide
 (limestone)
  (lime)
  But sodium and potassium carbonates do not break down, since 
 
the compounds of these reactive metals are more stable. (See page 189.) The ‘fizz’ in this soft drink is caused 
by carbon dioxide escaping.
 Gas-fuelled water heaters and boilers 
should be checked r
egularly. Every year, 
hundreds of people are killed by carbon 
monoxide from faulty burners. 
Some non-metal S and their compound S
236
Some carbon compounds

--- Page 238 ---
 The Amazon rainfor est – packed full of organic compounds.
Methane
Methane is the compound CH4.
  It is found in gas deposits in the ocean floor and on land, as natural gas. 
We use natural gas as a fuel. 
  It also forms wherever bacteria break down plant material, in the 
absence of oxygen. For example in paddy fields, and swamps, and landfill sites (rubbish dumps).
  Some animals give out methane as waste gas. They include cattle, sheep,
 goats, camel, and buffalo. Bacteria in their stomachs help to 
break down grass and other food, giving methane as one product.
Organic compounds
Methane is an organic compound. Organic compounds all contain carbon, and most contain hydrogen. Some contain elements like sulfur and nitrogen too. Many are found in, or derived from, living things. 
Methane is the simplest organic compound. There are millions more – 
far more than all the inorganic (non-organic) compounds. They include:
  the proteins, carbohydrates, and fats in your body
  the hundreds of dif ferent compounds in petroleum and coal
  the plastics and medical drugs made from the compounds in petroleum.
The study of these carbon compounds is called 
organic chemistry. 
The next two chapters in this book are about organic chemistry.
Q
1 Give the wor d equation for the combustion of natural gas:  
a
 in a gas boiler
, when the boiler is working well. 
 b
  in a gas boiler
, when the air inlet is partly blocked 
with soot.
2 Gas boilers should be checked r egularly, to make sure air 
flows through the burner properly. Why?3 a  W rite an equation to show what happens when lead(II) 
carbonate is heated. 
 b
 What is this type of r
eaction called? (Page 189?)
4 a Name thr ee sources of methane, CH4.
 b
 Which do you think is the main sour
ce?
5 Is it organic, or inorganic?  a  sodium chloride  b  water Built up fr om organic compounds, 
and around 20% carbon!
 This fir e extinguisher sprays out 
carbon dioxide gas. (Things will not burn 
in an atmosphere of carbon dioxide.)
237Some non-metal S and their compound S

--- Page 239 ---
16.8
Carbon dioxide and methane are greenhouse gases
Carbon dioxide and methane are both greenhouse gases. That means they 
absorb heat in the atmosphere, and prevent it from escaping into space.
This is how greenhouse gases work:
atmosphere
tatmatatmatospospospppherherhherrheeeeeeSun
Earth1  The sun sends out energy  
as light and UV rays.
2
  These warm the Earth, which 
reflects some of the
 energy 
away again, as heat.3
  Some of this heat escapes
 
from the atmosphere.
4
  But some is absorbed by
 greenhouse 
gases in the atmosphere. So the air, and Earth, are warmed.
There are several greenhouse gases. Carbon dioxide and methane are the two main ones we add to the atmosphere, through human activity. There is much more carbon dioxide than methane in the atmosphere.  But the levels of both are rising:
  The level of carbon dioxide is rising because we burn more fossil fuel each year
. The carbon dioxide from this goes into the atmosphere. 
It cannot escape into space, and the ocean can dissolve only some of it.
  The level of methane is rising because there is an increase in animal farming, and rice farming, around the world – and more and more landfill sites. 
W
e need greenhouse gases. Without them, we would freeze to death at 
night, when the sun was not shining. But many scientists think the level of greenhouse gases is now so high that it is causing global warming.
Global warming
Measurements show that average temperatures around the world are rising. We call this global warming.
Why is it happening? Some scientists say it is a 
natural change, like similar changes in the past.
However, a panel of scientists from around the 
world examined all the data, and concluded that greenhouse gases are almost certainly the main cause. 
They picked out carbon dioxide as the main culprit. 
The rise in average temperatures over time appears to match the rise in carbon dioxide levels over time. Compare the two graphs on the right.Carbon dioxide and global mean temperatures
Concentration
of CO2 in the
atmospher e/
parts per million380
340
300
14.6
14.2
13.8
13.4
2000 1980 1960 1940
Year1920 1900 1880Estimated
global mean
temperature/ °C
 T wo methane manufacturers.Some non-metal S and their compound S
238
Greenhouse gases, and global warming

--- Page 240 ---
Climate change
Air temperature affects rainfall, and cloud cover, and wind patterns.  
So as average temperatures rise, climates around the world change too.
Scientists try to predict what will happen, using computer models.  
They cannot make really good predictions yet, because they do not fully understand the links between weather, and clouds, and the ocean.
But they do predict that:
  some places with quite a lot of rain will become very dry , and other 
places will get much wetter.
  melting land-ice in the Arctic and Antarctica will cause sea levels to 
rise,
 so low-lying countries will be at risk of flooding.
  storms, floods, and wildfires will be more frequent and severe.
  species that cannot adapt to the changing climate  will die out.
  more drought is likely , which will led to famine – so more people will 
become refugees.
Most experts agree that climate change is already underway.
What can we do?
If global warming is a natural change, we can do nothing to stop it.  We can only prepare for the consequences.
If we are causing global warming by burning fossil fuels, we still cannot 
stop it, because the level of carbon dioxide already in the air is enough to cause a further temperature rise. All we can do is cut back heavily on new emissions of carbon dioxide, to stop warming getting out of control.
  Many people are trying to cut back on using fossil fuel, for example by using public transport or bikes, or walking, rather than going by car
. 
  Many countries have set targets for switching to clean ways to get  
electricity, such as windpower and solar power.
  Scientists are looking at ways to reduce the amount of carbon dioxide  
entering the atmosphere. For example by capturing it from power station chimneys, and burying it deep underground. 
 Some countries are starting to prepare for climate change. The poorest countries are likely to suf
fer most, since they do not have enough money  
to cope well with floods, drought, and other disasters.
Q
1 a W e need greenhouse gases. Why?
 b
 So why ar
e they becoming a problem?
2 The two main gr eenhouse gases we are adding to the 
atmosphere are …?
3 Global warming could lead to the extinction of some  species 
of living things. Explain why.4 The mor e carbon dioxide in the air, the more will dissolve in 
the ocean. (A balance is reached.) 
 a
 Which type of oxide is carbon dioxide: acidic or basic?
 b
 i
  How might the pH of the ocean be af
fected by our 
burning of fossil fuels? Explain.
  
ii
 Do you think this could cause pr
oblems? Explain. Many countries ar e already having 
more severe floods than usual.
 Melting ice in the Ar ctic means polar 
bears are under threat. 
239Some non-metal S and their compound S

--- Page 241 ---
16.9
 Limestone – made fr om the shells 
and skeletons of sea creatures.
Lime 
When limestone is heated, it breaks down to lime (or quicklime): 
 
CaCO3 (s)  CaO ( s)  1  CO2 (g)
 calcium carbonate
  calcium oxide
  carbon dioxide
 
(limestone)
  (lime)
This is 
thermal decomposition.
The drawing shows a lime kiln. The kiln is 
heated. Limestone is fed in at one end. Lime comes out the other. 
The reaction is reversible. So the calcium 
oxide and carbon dioxide could combine again. But air is blown through the kiln to carry the carbon dioxide away before  it has a chance to react.
 A r otary kiln for making lime.fuel
limestone
crushedlumps of
limestone
good draught
of air inROTARY KILNcarbon
dioxide
out stainless steel lined
with refractory
bricks
limepowdered limestoneused
  to neutralise acidity in soil
  for flue gas desulfurisation  
(see next page)
slaked lime, Ca(OH)2
used
  to neutralise acidity in soil, and in lakes af
fected by acid rain
 for flue gas desulfurisationlimestone, CaCO3
heat with clayheatcrushcrushed limestoneused
  in extracting iron from iron ore
 for road building
  as chips (aggregate) for concrete
lime, CaOused
  in making steel from iron
  to neutralise acidity in soil
 as a drying agent in industry
cement
 used to make concretegrind
add waterSome non-metal
S
 and their compound
S
240
Limestone
Limestone: from sea creatures 
Most of the creatures that live in the sea have shells or skeletons made of calcium carbonate. When they die, their remains fall to the sea floor. Slowly, over millions of years, the layers of shells and bones become limestone rock. (The soft parts of sea organisms become oil and gas.)
Over millions of years, powerful forces raised some sea beds upwards, 
draining them to form land. That explains why plenty of limestone is found inland, miles from the sea!
Making use of limestone 
Around 5 billion tonnes of limestone are quarried from the Earth’s crust every year. This is what it is used for:

--- Page 242 ---
 Cement: limestone heated with clay – 
and gypsum is added to slow down the 
'setting' pr
ocess. 
 Flue gas desulfurisation r emoves 
sulfur dioxide from waste gases. 
Slaked lime  
Slaked lime forms when water is added to lime. The reaction is 
exothermic, so the mixture hisses and steams. Conditions are controlled so that the slaked lime forms as a fine powder:
 CaO (
s)
 1
 
H2O (l)  Ca(OH)2 (s)
 calcium oxide
    calcium hydroxide
 (lime)
    (slaked 
lime)
Slaked lime is used to neutralise acidity in soil, and in lakes. In the lab, we use it to test for carbon dioxide. Limewater is a weak solution of calcium hydroxide, which is sparingly soluble in water. (See the test on page 285.)
Cement
Cement is made by mixing limestone with clay, heating the mixture strongly in a kiln, adding gypsum (hydrated calcium sulfate), and grinding up the final solid to give a powder. 
Flue gas desulfurisation
Flue gas desulfurisation means the removal of sulfur dioxide from the waste gases at power stations, before they go out the flue (chimney).
It is usually carried out using a runny mixture of powdered limestone, or 
slaked lime, and water. The mixture is sprayed through the waste gases, or the gases are bubbled through it.
When slaked lime is used, the reaction that removes the sulfur dioxide is:
 Ca(OH)2 (s) 1  SO2 (g)  CaSO3 (s) 1  H2O (l)
 calcium hydroxide
  sulfur dioxide
  calcium sulfite
  water 
Then the calcium sulfite can be turned into hydrated calcium sulfate:
 2CaSO3 (s) 1  O2 (g) 1  4H2O (l)  2 CaSO4.2H2O (s)
 calcium sulfite
  oxygen
  water
  hydrated
 
      calcium sulfate
Hydrated calcium sulfate is known as 
gypsum. It is used in making 
cement, plaster board, plaster for broken limbs, and other products. So 
the company that owns the power station can sell it, to earn some money.
Q
1 How was limestone formed?
2 a How is lime made? W rite the equation.
 b
 Why is it important to r
emove the carbon dioxide?
 c
 How is the carbon dioxide r
emoved, in a lime kiln?
3 How is slaked lime made? W rite the equation.
4 Give two uses each for lime and slaked lime.
5 Limewater is a solution of slaked lime. It is used for …?6 Slaked lime is mor e soluble in water than limestone is. 
Which of the two might be a better choice, for controlling 
soil acidity in a rainy area? Explain your choice.
7 a Explain the term flue gas desulfurisation.
 b
 Name a material used for this pr
ocess.
 c
  Calcium sulfite fr
om the process is often turned into 
gypsum. What is gypsum, and why do they make it? 
241Some non-metal S and their compound S

--- Page 243 ---
Questions
Core curriculum
1  An NPK fertiliser contains the three main elements  
that plants need, for healthy growth.
 a
 Name the three elements.
 b
 
Describe how each element helps plants.
 c
  Which of the three elements are provided by
 the 
following fertilisers?
  i
 ammonium phosphate
  ii
 potassium nitrate
  iii
 ammonium sulfate
 d
 W
rite a formula for each fertiliser in c.
2
 a
 Copy the diagram below
. Then fill in:
  
i
 the common names of the substances
  
ii
 their chemical formulae
calcium hydroxide
(solid)i
iicalcium hydroxide
(solution)i
iicalcium
carbonatei
ii
calcium oxidei
ii
add water
 b  Beside each arrow say how the change is carried 
out. One example is shown.
 c
  Give three reasons why limestone is an important raw material.
3
 Limestone is calcium carbonate, CaCO3. It is 
quarried on a huge scale.
 a
 Which elements does it contain?
 b
  Much of the quarried limestone is turned into lime (CaO) for the steel industry
.
  
i
 What is the chemical name for lime?
  
ii
 Describe how it is made from limestone.
 c
  Powdered limestone is used to improve the water quality in acidified lakes.
  
i
 How might the lakes have become acidified?
  
ii
 Why is limestone added?
  
iii
  The limestone is used in powdered form, not lumps. Why? T
ry for more than one reason.
 d
 List other important uses of limestone.Revision checklist
Core curriculum
Make sure you can …
 say how these can be prepared in the lab:
 
hydrogen
 ammonia
 and give two reactions for each of them
 give the equation for the reversible reaction between nitrogen and hydrogen 
 name the three main elements plants need from the
 soil, and say why they need them 
 – explain what fertilisers are
 –
 say why they are needed
 –
 and give examples of salts that act as fertilisers
 describe two problems associated with fertilisers
 give equations for three dif ferent types of reaction 
that produce carbon dioxide (including respiration)
 give three sources of methane
 explain what a greenhouse gas is, and how it works
 name two greenhouse gases
 explain these terms:
 global warming
 climate change
 say that many scientists (but not all) believe that   
carbon dioxide plays a key role in climate change
 
 describe how limestone is converted to lime and slaked lime, and give equations
 give at least two uses each for limestone, lime and 
slaked lime 
 explain what flue gas desulfurisation means, and 
describe how it is carried out
 say what gypsum is, and give some uses for it
Extended curriculum
Make sure you can also …
 explain why ammonia is an important chemical
 say how the raw materials (nitrogen and hydrogen)  
are obtained, for making ammonia  
 state the conditions used in the manufacture of ammonia, and explain the choice of conditions
 name three sources of sulfur
 state three uses of sulfur dioxide
 describe the Contact process for making sulfuric acid, starting with sulfur
, and state the conditions
 give the typical acid properties of dilute sulfuric acid
 sketch the carbon cycle, and give equations for these three reactions linked to the carbon cycle: 
 respiration, combustion of a fuel such as methane, and photosynthesis
Checkup on Chapter 16Some non-metal S and their compound S
242


--- Page 244 ---
4 Powdered limestone is used to treat the waste gases  
from power stations that burn coal and petroleum.
 The equation for the reaction that takes place is:
 
CaCO3 (s) 1 SO2 (g)  CaSO3 (s) 1 CO2 (g)
 a
 
i
  Name the gas that is removed by this reaction.
  
ii
 Why is it important to remove this gas?
 b
 Why are large lumps of limestone 
not used?
 c
  The process is called 
flue gas desulfurisation. 
Explain clearly what this means.
 d
  The calcium sulfite is usually turned into 
gypsum, which has the formula 
CaSO4.2H2O.
  
i
 What is the 
full chemical name for gypsum?
  
ii
  Which type of chemical reaction occurs when
 
   
CaSO3 is converted into CaSO4?
  
iii
 Give two uses for
 gypsum.
 e
  Name two chemicals that could be used to make
 
calcium sulfate by precipitation. 
Extended curriculum
5 This is about the manufacture of ammonia.
 a
 Which two gases react 
to give ammonia?
 b
 Why are the two gases scrubbed?
 c
 Why is the mixture passed over iron?
 d
  What happens to the 
unreacted nitrogen and 
hydrogen?
 e
  In manufacturing ammonia, is the chosen 
 
pressure high, low, or moderate? Explain why.
6
 Nitrogen and hydrogen are converted to ammonia in the Haber process:
 
N2 (g) 1 3H2 (g)  2NH3 (g)
 Below is the energy level diagram for the reaction. 
EnergyN2 + 3H 2
Progress of reaction2NH 3
 a What does this diagram tell you?
 b
  Explain why high temperatures are 
not used in 
the manufacture of ammonia.
 c
  The reaction is 
reversible, and reaches 
equilibrium. Explain very clearly what the two terms in italics mean.
 d
 
i
  What ef
fect does a catalyst have on an 
equilibrium reaction? 
  
ii
 Which catalyst is used in the Haber process?
  
iii
  What ef
fect does this catalyst have on the % 
yield of ammonia?7
 Sulfuric acid is made by the Contact process. 
 The first stage is to make sulfur trioxide, like this: 
 
2SO2 (g) 1  O2 (g)  2SO3 (g)
 The energy change in the reaction is 
 – 97 kJ
 /
 mo
l.
 a
 Name the catalyst used in this reaction.
 b
 Is the reaction exothermic, or endothermic?
 c
  What are the reaction conditions for making sulfur trioxide?
 d
  W
ill the yield of sulfur trioxide increase, 
decrease, or stay the same, if the temperature is raised? Explain your answer.
 e
  Describe how sulfur trioxide is changed into concentrated sulfuric acid.
8
 Below is a flow chart for the Contact process: 
purifier
catalyst chamber  
containing substance C
dissolved in  
substance D
mixed with  
substance E
substance Fsubstance A substance B
 a Name the substances A, B, C, D, E, and F.
 b
 Why is a catalyst used?
 c
  W
rite a chemical equation for the reaction that 
takes place on the catalyst.
 d
  The production of substance 
F is very 
important. Why? Give three reasons.
 e
  Copy out the flow chart, and write in the full names of the dif
ferent substances.
9
 Dilute sulfuric acid has typical acid properties.
 An excess of it is added to test-tubes 
W, X, Y and Z, 
which contain these powdered substances: 
 W
 copper(II) oxide
 X
 magnesium 
 Y
 calcium hydroxide
 Z
 sodium carbonate
 a
 In which test-tubes will you observe fizzing?
 b
  In which test-tube will a coloured solution form?
 c
  In which of the 
test-tubes does neutralisation 
take place?
 d
  Name the four salts obtained, after reaction.
 e
 W
rite balanced equations for the four reactions. Some non-metal S and their compound S
243

--- Page 245 ---
17.1Organic chemistry
244
Petroleum: a fossil fuel    
The fossil fuels 
The fossil fuels are petroleum (or crude oil), coal, and natural gas. 
They are called fossil fuels because they are the remains of plants and animals that lived millions of years ago. 
What is in petroleum?
Petroleum is a smelly mixture of hundreds of different compounds. They are organic compounds, which means they contain carbon, and usually hydrogen. 
In fact most are hydrocarbons – they contain only carbon and hydrogen. 
These drawings show molecules of three different hydrocarbons:
HCH
HCHH
HCH
HCH
HCH
HCHH
H H
H H
H HH H
H HC
CC
C
CCH
HH CCHH
HHH
C
HCHCH
H
H
H
This is a molecule of pentane, 
C5H12. It has a straight chain of 
5 carbon atoms.This is a molecule of cyclohexane, C
6H12. Here a chain of 6 carbon 
atoms form a ring.
Petroleum formed from the remains of dead organisms that fell to the ocean floor, and were buried under thick sediment. High pressures slowly converted them to petroleum, over millions of years. Natural gas is mainly methane.  It is often found with petroleum.  It is formed in the same way.  But high temperatures and high pressures caused the compounds to break down to gas.Coal is the remains of lush vegetation that grew in ancient swamps. The dead vegetation was buried under thick sediment. Pressure and heat slowly converted it to coal, over millions of years.
This is a molecule of 3-methyl pentane, C
6H14. Here 6 carbon 
atoms form a branched chain.
A formula drawn out in this way is called a structural formula.
Notice how the carbon atoms are bonded to each other, to make the spine  
of each molecule. The hydrogen atoms are bonded to the carbon atoms. In petroleum you will find hydrocarbon molecules of different shapes and sizes, with different numbers of carbon atoms, from 1 to over 70. 

--- Page 246 ---
245Organic chemistry
How we use petroleum
Over 13 billion litres of petroleum are used around the world every day.
Around half the petroleum pumped 
from oil wells is used for transport. It provides the fuel for cars, trucks, planes, and ships. You won’t get far without it!Most of the rest is burned for heat, in factories, homes, and power stations, as above. In a power station, the heat is used to turn water to steam, to drive turbines.A small % is used as the starting chemicals to make many other things: plastics, shampoo, paint, thread, fabric, detergents, makeup, medical drugs, and more.
 A platform for pumping petroleum from under the ocean.Many of the things you use every day were probably made from petroleum. Toothbrush, comb, and shampoo just for a start!
A non-renewable resource
Petroleum is still forming, very slowly, under the oceans. But we are using it up much faster than it can form, which means it will run out one day.
So petroleum is called a non-renewable 
resource. 
It is hard to tell when it will run out. 
At the present rate of use, some experts say the world’s reserves will last about  40 more years. What will we do then?
Q
1 The other name for petr oleum is … ?
2 Why is petr oleum called a fossil fuel?
3 What is a hydrocarbon?
4 What is petr oleum made of?5 Explain why petr oleum is such a valuable resource.
6 Petr oleum is called a non-renewable resource. Why?
7 What do you think we will use for fuel, when petroleum  
runs out?

--- Page 247 ---
17.2Organic chemistry
246
Refining petroleum
What does refining mean?
Petroleum contains hundreds of different hydrocarbons. But a big  
mixture like this is not very useful. 
So the first step is to separate the compounds into groups with molecules 
of a similar size. This is called refining the petroleum. It is carried out by fractional distillation.
Refining petroleum in the lab
The apparatus on the right can be used to refine petroleum in the lab. 
1
  As you heat the petroleum, the compounds start to evaporate. 
 
The ones with smaller lighter molecules go first, since it takes less 
energy to free these from the liquid.
2
  As the hot vapours rise, so does the thermometer reading. 
 
The vapours condense in the cool test-tube.
3
  When the thermometer reading reaches 100
 °C, replace the first 
test-tube
 with an empty one. The liquid in the first test-tube is  
your first fraction from the distillation.
4
  Collect three further fractions in the same way
, replacing the  
test-tube at 150
 
°C, 200
 
°C, and 300
 
°C. 
Comparing the fractions
Now compare the fractions – how runny they are, how easily they burn, and so on. You can burn samples on a watch glass, like this:
fraction 1 fraction 2 fraction 3 fraction 4
wick
It catches fire easily. The flame burns high, which shows that the liquid is volatile – it evaporates easily.This catches fire quite easily. The flame burns less high – so this fraction is less volatile than fraction 1.This seems less volatile than fraction 2. It does not catch fire so readily or burn so easily – it is not so flammable.This one does not ignite easily. You need to use a wick to keep it burning.It is the least flammable  of the four.
This table summarizes the results:
Fraction Boiling point  
rangeHow easily  
does it flow?How volatile is it? How easily  
does it burn?Size of  
molecules
1 up to 100
 °
 
C very runny volatile very easily small
large2 100 – 150
 °
 
C runny less volatile easily
3 150 – 200
 °
 
C not very runny even less volatile not easily
4 200 – 300
 °
 
C viscous (thick and sticky) least volatile only with a wickpear-shaped
ﬂask
petroleum
(crude oil)
test-tubethermometer
heat

--- Page 248 ---
247Organic chemistry
Q
1 Which two opposite pr ocesses take place, during  
fractional distillation?
2 A gr oup of compounds collected during fractional distillation 
is called a
  ………
 ?
3 What does it mean?  a  volatile  b  viscous4  List four ways in which the pr operties of different  
fractions differ.
5 Name the petr oleum fraction that:  a  is used for petr ol  
 b
 has the smallest molecules
 c
 is the most viscous
 d
 has molecules with 20 to 30 carbon atoms
crude 
oil in
very hot
(over 400° C)very thick
heavy liquid
solidcool
(25° C) The new road surface is bitumen 
mixed with fine gravel.
Name of  
fractionNumber of  
carbon atomsWhat fraction is used for
refinery gas C1 to C4 bottled gases for cooking and 
heating
gasoline (petrol) C5 to C6 fuel for cars
naphtha C6 to C10 starting point or feedstock for many chemicals and plastics
paraffin  (kerosene)C
10 to C15 fuel for aircraft, oil stoves,  and lamps
diesel oil (gas oil) C
15 to C20 fuel for diesel engines
fuel oil C20 to C30 fuel for power stations, ships, and for home heating systems
lubricating fractionC
30 to C50 oil for car engines and machinery; waxes and polishes
bitumen C
50 upwards for road surfaces and roofsboiling 
points  
and 
viscosity 
increase
As the molecules get larger, the fractions get less runny, or more viscous: 
from gas at the top of the tower to solid at the bottom. They also get less flammable. So the last two fractions in the table are not used as fuels. The trends the fractions show
Those results show that, the larger the molecules in a hydrocarbon:
–
 the higher its boiling point will be
–
 the less volatile it will be
–
 the less easily it will flow (or the more viscous it will be)
–
 the less easily it will burn.
These trends help to dictate what the dif
ferent fractions will be used for, 
as you will see below.
In the petroleum refinery
In a refinery, the fractional distillation is carried out in a tower that is kept 
very hot at the base, and cooler towards the top. Look at the drawing. 
Petroleum is pumped in at the base. The compounds start to boil off.  
Those with the smallest molecules boil off first, and rise to the top of the tower. Others rise only part of the way, depending on their boiling points, and then condense.
The table shows the fractions that are collected.

--- Page 249 ---
17.3Organic chemistry
248
Cracking hydrocarbons
After fractional distillation …
Petroleum is separated into fractions by fractional distillation. 
But that is not the end of the story. The fractions all need further treatment before they can be used.1
  They contain impurities – mainly sulfur compounds. If left in the fuels, these will burn to form harmful sulfur dioxide gas.
2
  Some fractions are separated further into single compounds, or smaller groups of compounds. For example the gas fraction is separated into methane, ethane, propane, and butane. (W
e buy butane in canisters.)
3
  Part of a fraction may be 
cracked.  
Cracking breaks molecules down into smaller ones.
Cracking a hydrocarbon in the lab
This experiment is carried out using a hydrocarbon oil from petroleum. The product is a gas, collected over water in the inverted test-tube:
 This sulfur was obtained from sulfur 
compounds removed from natural gas.
The reactant The product 
Appearance thick colourless liquid colourless gas
Smell no smell pungent smell
Flammability difficult to burn burns readily
Reactions few chemical reactions many chemical reactions
So the product is quite different from the reactant. Heating has caused the hydrocarbon to break down. A thermal decomposition has taken place. Note that:
  the reactant had a high boiling point and was not flammable – which means it had large molecules, with long chains of carbon atoms.
  the product has a low boiling point and is very volatile – so it must have small molecules, with short carbon chains.
  the product must also be a hydrocarbon, since nothing new was added. 
So the molecules of the starting hydrocarbon have been cracked. 
And since the product is reactive, it could be a useful chemical. 
 Some of the naphtha fraction from 
refining will be piped to the cracking plant.The moment heating is stopped, the delivery tube must be lifted out of  
the water. Otherwise water will get sucked up into the hot test-tube. Now compare the reactant and product:aluminium
oxide catalyst3–4 cm depth of
mineral wool soaked
with a hydrocarbon oilwater
heat

--- Page 250 ---
249Organic chemistry
Q
1 What happens during cracking?
2 Cracking is a thermal decomposition. Explain why.
3 Describe the usual conditions needed for cracking 
 a hydr
ocarbon in the petroleum refinery.
4 What is always produced in a cracking reaction?5 Explain why cracking is so important.
6 a  A straight-chain hydr ocarbon has the formula C5H12.  
Draw the structural formula for its molecules.
 b
  Now show what might happen when the compound 
 
is cracked.
HCCCCCCCCCCHHHHHHHHHH H
HHHHHHHHH H
HCCCCCH ++HHHH H
HHHH HCCHH
HHCCCHHH H
HHdecane, C10H22
from naphtha fraction
540°C, catalyst
pentane, C5H12
suitable for petrolpropene, 
C3H6ethene, C
2H4
HCH
HCHH
HCH
HCH
H+H2steam
>800 °C
ethene hydrogen ethane Plastic furniture: it all began with 
cracking.
 Decane is one of the hydrocarbons in 
white spirit, a solvent used to thin oil-
based paint, and clean paintbrushes.Cracking in the refinery 
In the refinery, cracking is carried out in a similar way.  
 The long-chain hydrocarbon is heated to vaporize it.
 The vapour is usually passed over a hot catalyst. 
 Thermal decomposition takes place. 
Why cracking is important
  Cracking helps you make the best use of petroleum. Suppose you have 
too much of the naphtha fraction, and too little of the gasoline fraction.
  
You can crack some naphtha to get molecules the right size for petrol. 
  Cracking always  produces short-chain compounds with a carbon–carbon  
double bond. This bond makes the compounds reactive. So they can be used to make plastics and other substances.
Examples of cracking
1  Cracking the naphtha fraction  Compounds in the naphtha fraction  
are often cracked, since this fraction is used as the feedstock for making 
many useful chemicals. This is the kind of reaction that occurs: 
 So decane has been broken down into three smaller molecules. 
 
  The propene and ethene molecules have carbon–carbon double bonds. 
 
These two compounds belong to the alkene family, and they are very 
reactive.
2
  Cracking ethane
 Ethane has very short molecules – but even it can 
 
be cracked, to give ethene and hydrogen: 
The hydrogen can be used to make ammonia – see page 226. 

--- Page 251 ---
17.4Organic chemistry
250
Families of organic compounds
 Natural gas burning at a cooker hob: 
it is mainly methane, the simplest alkane.
Compound methane ethane propane butane
FormulaCH4 C2H6 C3H8 C4H10
Structural formula
HCH
HH HCH
HCH
HH HCH
HCH
HCH
HH HCH
HCH
HCH
HCH
HH
Number of carbon 
atoms in the chain1 2 3 4
Boiling point
 / 
°
 
C 2164 2187 242 20.5
boiling point increases with chain lengthWhat their names tell you
There are millions of organic compounds. That could make organic 
chemistry confusing – but to avoid this, the compounds are named in  a very logical way. 
The rest of this chapter is about some families of organic compounds.  
For these families, the name of the organic compound tells you:
 which family it belongs to
 how many carbon atoms are in it.
Look at these two tables:
If the name  
ends in …… the compound 
belongs  to this family …Example
-ane the alkanes ethane, C2H6
-ene the alkenes ethene, C2H4
-ol the alcohols ethanol, C2H5OH
-oic acid the carboxylic acids ethanoic acid, CH3COOH
This in the  
name …… means this many carbon  atoms …Example from the alkane  family
meth- 1 methane, CH
4
eth- 2 ethane, C2H6
prop- 3 propane, C3H8
but- 4 butane, C4H10
pent- 5 pentane, C5H12
hex- 6 hexane, C6H14
The alkanes: the simplest family
Here again are the first four members of the alkane family. Note that 
methane is the simplest member. What patterns do you notice?

--- Page 252 ---
251Organic chemistry
Q
1 Propanol  is an organic compound. 
 a
 How many carbon atoms does it contain? 
 b
 Which family does it belong to? 
 c
 See if you can draw a structural formula for it.2 Draw a structural formula for the alkane called hexane.
3 An alkane has 32 carbon atoms in each molecule.
 Give its formula.
4 T ry to draw the structural formula for propanoic acid.Comparing families
This table shows one member from each of the four families. Compare them.
Functional groups
A functional group is the part of a molecule that largely dictates how 
the molecule will react.
For example, all the alkenes have similar reactions because they all have 
the same functional group, the C5C bond.
Homologous series
Look back at the alkanes in the table at the bottom of page 250.  They form a homologous series. In a homologous series:
  All the compounds fit the same general formula.  
For the alkanes the general formula is CnH2n12, where n is a number. 
For methane n is 1, giving the formula CH4.  
For ethane n is 2, giving C2H6.  
For propane n is 3, giving C3H8. 
 The chain length increases by 1 each time.
  As the chain gets longer , the compounds show a gradual change in 
properties. For example, their boiling points rise, and they burn  less easily.
As you will see later, all four families in this unit form homologous series.Family A member Structural formula Comments
alkanes ethane,  
C2H6HCH
HCH
HH  The alkanes contain only carbon and hydr ogen, so they are 
hydrocarbons.
  The bonds between their carbon atoms ar e all  
single bonds.
alkenes ethene, C
2H4 CH
CH
H H  The alkenes are hydrocarbons.
  All alkenes contain carbon – carbon double bonds. 
  The C 5C bond is called their functional group.
alcohols ethanol,  
C2H5OHHCH
HCH
HOH  The alcohols ar e not hydrocarbons.
  They ar e like the alkanes, but with an OH group.
  The OH gr oup is their functional group.
carboxylic acids ethanoic acid, 
CH3COOHHH
HO
OHCC  The carboxylic acids ar e not hydrocarbons.
  All carboxylic acids contain the COOH group.
  The COOH gr oup is their functional group.
!In a homologous series …
As the chain gets longer:
 melting and boiling points rise
 viscosity increases – the  
compounds flow less easily
 flammability decreases – the compounds burn less easily.

--- Page 253 ---
17.5Organic chemistry
252
The alkanes
one shared pair of electrons
(a single bond)
HC CHHH
HH
 The bonding in ethane.
 Butane is used as fuel for cooking 
and heating, in many homes. Alkanes: a reminder
This is what you have learned about the alkanes so far:
 The alkanes are the simplest family of organic compounds.
 They are hydrocarbons: they contain only carbon and hydrogen. 
 Their carbon – carbon bonds are all single bonds.
 They form a homologous series, with the general formula CnH2n12.
This table shows the first four members of the alkane family. 
What patterns do you notice?
Key points about the alkanes
1  They are found in petroleum and natural gas. Petroleum contains alkanes with up to 70 carbon atoms. Natural gas is mainly methane, with small amounts of ethane, propane, butane, and other compounds. 
2
  The first four alkanes are gases at room temperature. The next twelve are liquids. The rest are solids. Boiling points increase with chain length because attraction between the molecules increases – so it takes more energy to separate them.
3
  Since all their carbon – carbon bonds are single bonds, the alkanes are 
 
called saturated. Look at the bonding in ethane on the right above.
4
 Generally
, the alkanes are quite unreactive.
5
  But alkanes do burn well in a good supply of oxygen, forming carbon 
 
dioxide and water vapour, and giving out plenty of heat. So they are  used as fuels. Methane burns the most easily. Like this:
 
CH4 ( g) 1 2O2 ( g)    CO2 ( g) 1 2H2O (l) 1 heat energy
6
  
If there is not enough oxygen, the alkanes undergo incomplete  combustion, giving poisonous carbon monoxide. For example:
 
2CH4 ( g) 1 3O2 ( g)    2CO (  g ) 1 4H2O (l) 1 less heat energyCompound methane ethane propane butane
FormulaCH4 C2H6 C3H8 C4H10
Structural formula
HCH
HH HCH
HCH
HH HCH
HCH
HCH
HH HCH
HCH
HCH
HCH
HH
Number of carbon 
atoms in the chain1 2 3 4
Boiling point
 / 
°
 
C 2164 287 242 20.5
boiling point increases with chain length

--- Page 254 ---
253Organic chemistry
Q
1 Describe the bonding in ethane. A drawing will help!
2 Why ar e alkanes such as methane and butane used as 
 fuels? See if you can give 
at least two reasons.
3 Butane bur ns in a similar way to methane. See if you 
 write a balanced equation for its combustion.
4 a The r eaction of chlorine with methane is called a 
  
substitution reaction. Why?
 b
 What special condition is needed, for this r
eaction?5 Ethane r eacts with chlorine, in a substitution reaction.
 a
  Draw the structural formula for each compound that 
 
can form, as the reaction proceeds. (Isomers too!) 
 b
 W
rite the formula for each compound in a. 
6 The compound C5H12 has three isomers.
 a
 Draw the structur
es of these three isomers.
 b
  Their boiling points
 are 9.5, 28, and 36 °
 C. Match 
 
these to your drawings, and explain your choice.
!Chlorine and methane
The hydrogen atoms can be replaced 
one by one: 
chloromethane
 
CH3Cl
dichloromethane
 
CH2Cl2
trichloromethane  CHCl3
tetrachloromethane  CCl4
All four are used as solvents. But 
they can cause health problems, so are being used less and less.7 Alkanes also react with chlorine in sunlight. For example:
 methanelight
chloromethaneHCH
HHC l2 +H CH
HCl HCl +
  This is called a substitution reaction, because a chlorine atom takes 
the place of a hydrogen atom. If there is enough chlorine, all four 
hydrogen atoms will be replaced, one by one. Look at the panel on the right.
  The reaction can be explosive in sunlight. But it will not take place 
 
in the dark, because it is also a photochemical reaction: light energy is needed to break the bonds in the chlorine molecules, to start the reaction off.
Isomers
butane 2-methylpropane
boiling point 0 °  C boiling point –  10 °  C
Compare these alkane molecules. Both have the same formula, C4H10. 
But they have different structures. The first has a straight or unbranched chain. In the second, the chain is branched. 
The two compounds are isomers. 
Isomers are compounds with the same formula, but different structures.
The more carbon atoms in a compound, the more isomers it has. 
There are 75 isomers with the formula C
10H22, for example. 
Since isomers have different structures, they also have slightly different properties. For example branched isomers have lower boiling points, because the branches make it harder for the molecules to get close. So the attraction between them is less strong, and less heat is needed to overcome it.
 Branched-chain hydrocarbons burn 
less easily than their straight-chain 
isomers. So they are used in petrol to control combustion and stop engine 'knock' – and especially for racing cars.

--- Page 255 ---
17.6Organic chemistry
254
The alkenes
The alkene family
 The alkenes are hydrocarbons.
 They form a homologous series, with the general formula CnH2n. 
  They all contain the C 5C double bond. This is their functional group, 
and largely dictates their reactions. Look at the bonding in ethene. 
  Because they contain C 5C double bonds, they are called unsaturated.
 (Alkanes have only single carbon – carbon bonds, so are 
saturated.) 
Here are the first three members of the family. Note how ethene is drawn:HH
HCC
H
 The bonding in ethene. 
 Ethanol is a good solvent. It also kills 
many germs, so it is used in disinfectant 
gels for wiping your hands, in hospital.Compound ethene prope ne but-1-ene
Formula C2H4 C3H6 C4H8
Structural formula H H
H HCC C
HCH
HHH
HC C
HCH
HCH
HHH
HCH H
H HCC C
HCH
HHH
HC C
HCH
HCH
HHH
HCH H
H HCC C
HCH
HHH
HC C
HCH
HCH
HHH
HC
Number of  
carbon atoms2 3 4
Boiling point
 / 
°
 
C 2102 247 26.5
Do you agree that these compounds fit the general formula CnH2n?
Key points about the alkenes
1 The alkenes are made from alkanes by cracking. For example ethene
 is formed by cracking ethane. Hydrogen is also produced:
HCH
HCHH
HCH
HCH
H+H2steam
>800 ºC
ethene hydrogen ethane
2  Alkanes are much more reactive than alkanes, because the double bond  
can break, to add on other atoms. For example, ethene can add on 
hydrogen again, to form ethane:
HCH
HCH   (g) HH
ethane etheneCH
CH
H H(g)  H2(g) +
a catalystheat, pressure
 It also adds on water (as steam) to form ethanol, an alcohol:
HCHH
C OH (l )HH
ethanol etheneCH
CH
H H(g)  H2O(g) +
a catalystheat, pressure
 These reactions are called addition reactions. Can you see why?
  An addition reaction turns an unsaturated alkene into a saturated 
compound.


--- Page 256 ---
255Organic chemistry
!
Q
1 a Name the two simplest alkenes.
 b
 Now draw their 
structural formulae.
2 What makes alkenes r eact so differently from alkanes?
3 Ethene can polymerise. What does that mean?4 a Pr opene is unsaturated. What does that mean?
 b
 W
rite an equation for its reaction with bromine.
5 How would you tur n propene into:
 a
 
propane?
  
b
 pr
opanol? 
 Polythene is used to make plastic 
bottles, plastic bags, plastic sheeting … Polymerisation
Alkene molecules undergo a very useful addition reaction, where they  
add on to each other to form compounds with very long carbon chains. 
The alkene molecules are called monomers. The long-chain compounds 
that form are called polymers. The reaction is called polymerisation.  For example ethene polymerises like this:
  H
CC
H
H HHHHHHHHHHHHH
CCCCCCCCCCCCH
HH
CC
HHHH
CC
HHHH
CC
HHHH
CC
HHHH
CC
HHH
HHHHHHHHHHethene molecules (monomers)
part of a polythene
molecule(a polymer)polymerisation
The product is poly(ethene) or polythene. The chain can be many 
thousands of carbon atoms long!
A test for unsaturation
You can use bromine water to test whether a hydrocarbon is unsaturated. It is an orange solution of bromine in water. If a C5C bond is present, an addition reaction takes place and the colour disappears. For example:
HCBr
HCH  (l)Br
H
1,2– dibromoethane
(colourless)ethene
(colourless)CH
CH
H H(g)  Br2(ag)
(orange) +
Isomers in the alkene family
In alkenes, the chains can branch in different ways, and the double bonds can be in different positions. 
Compare the three compounds below. All three have the formula C
4H8, but 
they have different structures. So they are isomers.
H
HCH
HC
HCH
H
HC but-1-eneHCH
HC
HCH
H
HCHH
HCH
HCHH
HC
C H
but-2-ene 2-methylpropene
Now look at the numbers in their three names. What do these tell you? The short way to show it …
You can show polymerisation in  
a short way, like this. n stands for  a very large number.
n
nH
HCH
HCHH H
HCC

--- Page 257 ---
17.7Organic chemistry
256
The alcohols
 Ethanol is used as a solvent for 
perfume. Why?
 Corn (maize) is widely grown in  
the USA to make ethanol, for car fuel. 
Fuel made from plant material, using yeast or bacteria, is called biofuel.What are alcohols?
 The alcohols are the family of organic compounds that contain the OH 
group. This table shows the first four members:
Alcohol methanol ethanol propan-1-ol butan-1-ol
Formula CH3OH C2H5OH C3H7OH C4H9OH
Structural formula
HCH
HCH
HO H HCH
HOHH CH
HCH
HCH
HOHH CH
HCH
HCH
HCH
HO H HCH
HCH
HOH HCH
HOHH CH
HCH
HCH
HOHH CH
HCH
HCH
HCH
HO H HCH
HCH
HO H HCHHOHH
CH
HCH
HCH
HOHH CH
HCH
HCH
HCH
HO HHCH
HCH
HO H HCHHOHH CH
HCH
HCH
HOHH
CH
HCH
HCH
HCH
HOH
Number of  
carbon atoms1 2 3 4
Boiling point
 / 
°
 
C 65 78 87 117
Note that:
  they form a homologous series, with the general formula CnH2n11OH. 
 their OH functional group means they will all react in a similar way . 
  two of the names above have  -1-  in. This tells you that the OH group  
is attached to a carbon atom at one end of the chain. 
Ethanol, an important alcohol
 Ethanol is the alcohol in alcoholic drinks.
  It is a good solvent. It dissolves many substances that do not dissolve 
in water.
  It evaporates easily  – it is volatile. That makes it a suitable solvent to 
use in glues, printing inks, perfumes, and aftershave
Two ways to make ethanol
Ethanol is made in two ways, one biological and one chemical. 
1 By f ermentation – the biological way
  Ethanol is made from glucose using yeast, in the absence of air:   
 C6H12O6 (aq)                            2C2H5OH (aq)  1  2CO2 ( g) 1  energy
 glucose
 ethanol
 carbon dioxide
   Y east is a mass of living cells. The enzymes in it catalyse the 
reaction. (See page 142.)
  The process is called fermentation, and it is exothermic. 
   Ethanol can be made in this way from any substance that contains  
sugar, starch, or cellulose. (These break down to glucose.) For example it can be made from sugarcane, maize, potatoes, and wood.
   The yeast stops working when the % of ethanol reaches a certain level,
 or if the mixture gets too warm.
   The ethanol is separated from the final mixture by fractional distillation.in yeastenzymes

--- Page 258 ---
257Organic chemistry
!
… although carbon dioxide is 
given out when ethanol burns …… it is taken in by plants being grown to make more ethanol.
By contrast, the carbon dioxide given out when fossil fuels burn was 
taken in from the atmosphere many millions of years ago.
Q
1 All alcohols r eact in a similar way. Why?
2 Draw the structural formula for ethanol.
3 Give thr ee uses of ethanol.
4  In Brazil, sugar cane is used to make ethanol.  
Name the process used, and say what the catalyst is.5 a W rite a word equation for the combustion (burning) of:  
  
i
 ethanol
  
ii
 methane
 
 b
 Compar
e the equations. What do you notice?
6 Ther e is another isomer with the same formula as  
propan-1-ol. Draw its structure, and suggest a name.
 Traffic in Rio de Janeiro in Brazil: 
running mainly on ethanol made from 
sugar cane.2 By the h ydration of ethene – the chemical way
 Hydration  means water is added on. This is an addition reaction.  
  The reaction is reversible, and exothermic.
   High pressure and a low temperature would give the best yield.   
But in practice the reaction is carried out at 570
 
°C, to give a decent 
rate of reaction.
  A catalyst is also used, to speed up the reaction.
Ethanol as a fuel
Ethanol burns well in oxygen, giving out plenty of heat:
 C2H5OH (l) 1 3O2 ( g)    2CO2 ( g) 1 3H2O (l) 1 heat
It is increasingly used as a fuel for car engines because:
 it can be made quite cheaply from waste plant material
  many countries have no petroleum of their own, and have to buy it 
from other countries; it costs a lot, so ethanol is an attractive option
  ethanol has less impact on carbon dioxide levels than fossil fuels  do.
Ethanol and global warming
Like the fossil fuels, ethanol does produce carbon dioxide when it burns. 
This is a greenhouse gas, linked to global warming. But ethanol has less impact on carbon dioxide levels in the atmosphere, because …C
HH
CHH
OH (l ) H H2O (g)570 ºC, 60–70 atm
a catalyst
(phosphoric acid)
ethene ethanolCH
CH
H H(g)+
The drawbacks
More and more crops are being 
grown to make ethanol, for cars.
 But that takes up a lot of land.  
 It means less land to grow crops for food.
 A shortage of food crops means a rise in food prices.
 When food prices rise, it affects poor people the most. 
Many people are against growing crops to make ethanol. They say: Feed people, not cars!


--- Page 259 ---
17.8Organic chemistry
258
The carboxylic acids
The carboxylic acid family
Now we look at the family of organic acids: the carboxylic acids. 
Here are the first four members of the family:
 Organic chemistry at the dinner table.
Vinegar (on the left) is mainly a solution 
of ethanoic acid in water. Olive oil, on the right, is made of esters.  (See page 275 for more about oils.)Name of acid methanoic ethanoic propanoic butanoic
Formula HCOOH CH3COOH C2H5COOH C3H7COOH
Structural formula
HCO
OHHH
HCCO
OHHHH
H HCC COOHHHH
HH
H HCC CCO
OH
HCOOH
HH
HCCO
OHHHH
H HCC COOHHHH
HH
H HCC CCO
OH
HCOOHHH
HCCO
OH
HHH
H HCC COOH
HHH
HH
H HCC CCO
OHHCOOHHH
HCCO
OHHHH
H HCC COOHHHH
HH
H HCC CCO
OH
Number of carbon 
atoms1 2 3 4
Boiling point
 / 
°
 
C 101 °
 
C 118 °
 
C 141 °
 
C 164 °
 
C
  The family forms a homologous series with the general formula 
CnH2nO2. Check that this fits with the formulae in the table above.
 The functional group COOH is also called the carboxyl group.
We focus on ethanoic acid in the rest of this unit. But remember that other carboxylic acids behave in a similar way, because they all contain the carboxyl group.
Two ways to make ethanoic acid
Ethanoic acid is made by oxidising ethanol:
 HH
HCCO
OHHHH
H HCC OH[O]
The oxidation can be carried out in two ways.
1 By f ermentation – the biological way
  When ethanol is left standing in air , bacteria bring about its oxidation 
to ethanoic acid. This method is called acid fermentation. 
 
 Acid fermentation is used to make 
vinegar (a dilute solution of 
ethanoic acid). The vinegar starts as foods such as apples, rice, and 
honey, which are first fermented to give ethanol.
2
 Using o
xidising agents – the chemical way
  Ethanol is oxidised much faster by warming it with the powerful oxidising agent potassium manganate(VII)
, in the presence of acid. 
The manganate(VII) ions are themselves reduced to Mn21 ions, with a 
colour change. The acid provides the H1 ions for the reaction:
 
MnO42 1 8H  1 1 5e  2    Mn21 1 4H2O
 purple
 colourless
 Potassium dichromate(VI) could also be used as the oxidising agent.
 As you saw on page 99, this gives a colour change from orange to green.
 

--- Page 260 ---
259Organic chemistry
!Ethanoic acid: typical acid reactions
Ethanoic acid shows typical acid reactions.
1
 A solution of ethanoic acid turns litmus red. 
2
  A solution of ethanoic acid contains H
 1 ions, because some of the 
ethanoic acid molecules dissociate in water, like this:
  
CH3COOH (aq)  some molecules CH3COO  2 (aq)  1  H  1 (aq)  
  
ethanoic acid
 ethanoate ions
 hydrogen ions
  Since only 
some molecules dissociate, ethanoic acid is a weak acid. 
3
  
Ethanoic acid reacts with metals, bases, and carbonates, to form salts. It reacts with sodium hydroxide like this:
 HH
HCCO
OH+      NaOH HH
HCCO
ONa(aq)( aq) +        H2O(l) (aq)
ethanoic acid sodium 
hydroxidesodium ethanoate
(a salt)water
 or  CH3COOH (aq) 1 NaOH (aq)    CH3COONa (aq) 1 H2O (l)
 Like all salts, sodium ethanoate is an ionic compound.
Esters
Ethanoic acid also reacts with alcohols, to give compounds called esters. 
The alcohol molecule is reversed below, to help you see what is happening:
C HH
HH
C C
HH
C
HH
C
HHO
OHHO + + C H H2OH2SO4
HHCO
Oconc
H C
HH
C
HH
C
HHthis group is called 
an ester linkage
ethanoic acid propanol
propyl ethanoate (an ester)water
or CH3COOH (l) 1 C3H7OH (l)  conc. H2SO4 CH3COOC3H7 (l) 1 H2O (l)
Note these points:
  T wo molecules have joined to make a larger molecule, with the loss of  
a small molecule, water. So this is called a condensation reaction. 
 The reaction is reversible , and sulfuric acid acts a catalyst. 
  The alcohol part comes first in the name  – but second in the formula.
  Propyl ethanoate smells of pears. In fact many esters have attractive  
smells and tastes. So they are added to shampoos and soaps for their 
smells, and to ice cream and other foods as flavourings.
  The smell and taste of the apple 
come from natural esters. Synthetic 
esters are used in the shampoo.
Q
1 What is the functional gr oup of the carboxylic acids?
2 Copy and complete. (Page 152 may help!)
 carboxylic acid 
1 metal
   1 
 carboxylic acid 1 alkali    1 
 carboxylic acid 1 alcohol   1 3 Carboxylic acids ar e weak acids. Explain why.
4 Draw structural formulae to show the r eaction between 
ethanol and ethanoic acid, and name the products.  
5 What is a condensation reaction?
6 Esters ar e important compounds in industry. Why?The ethanoate ion 
This is its structural formula:
HH
HCCO
O–

--- Page 261 ---
Checkup on Chapter 17Organic chemistry
260
Questions
Core curriculum
1 Petroleum is separated into fractions, like this:
 bubble
cap
crude
oil inBoiling
point
range (°C) Fraction
< 40
40 – 180180 – 250250 – 300300 – 350 > 350reﬁnery gas
petrol and naphthaparafﬁn (kerosene)diesel oilfuel oil–
semi-solid and
solid residue
 a i  What is this process called?
  
ii
  It uses the fact that dif
ferent compounds 
have different ………  ………. What is missing? 
 b
 i
  Is naphtha just one compound, or a group of 
compounds? Explain.
  
ii
  Using the terms 
evaporation and condensation, 
explain how naphtha is produced.
 c
 Give one use for each fraction obtained.
 d
 A hydrocarbon has a boiling point of 200
 
°
 
C. 
  
i
  Are its carbon chains shorter
, or longer, than 
those found in naphtha?
  
ii
  Is it more viscous, or less viscous, than 
 
the compounds found in naphtha?
2
 catalyst
cotton wool soaked in a
hydrocarbon oilheat
 A hydrocarbon can be cracked in the lab using 
the
 apparatus above.
 a
 What is cracking?
 b
  Which two things are needed, to crack the hydrocarbon?
 c
  The first tube of collected gas is discarded. Why? (What else is in the heated tube?)
 d
  At the end of the experiment, the delivery tube must be removed from the water immediately
. 
Why is this?
 e
  Ethane, C2H6, can be cracked to give ethene, 
C2H4, and hydrogen. Write an equation for this.Revision checklist
Core curriculum
Make sure you can …
  name the fossil fuels and say how they were formed
  explain what a hydrocarbon is
 explain why petroleum has to be refined , and:
 
–
 describe the refining process
 
–
 name the dif
ferent fractions 
 
–
 say what these fractions are used for
  explain what cracking is, and why it is so useful, 
 
and give the equation for the cracking of ethane
  say what a structural formula is, and draw 
structural formulae for  methane   ethane   ethene   ethanol   ethanoic acid
  say what family a compound belongs to, from its  
structural formula or its name
 give the functional groups for the alkenes, alcohols, and carboxylic acids
  describe alkanes as unreactive except for burning,  
and give an equation for the combustion of methane
  explain what unsaturated means and describe a test 
to identify an unsaturated hydrocarbon
  describe how ethene monomers add on to each other to form the polymer poly(ethene)
 describe the two ways of making ethanol
  give at least two uses for ethanol
 give the reaction for the combustion of ethanol
 give at least two advantages of ethanol as a fuel
Extended curriculum
Make sure you can also …
  name, and draw the structural formulae for , the 
four simplest members of each family: alkanes, alkenes, alcohols, and carboxylic acids
  give the general properties of a homologous series
  explain what isomers are, and draw examples
 describe the substitution reactions of alkanes  
with chlorine
  describe the addition reactions of alkenes with 
hydrogen and steam
 describe the two ways to make ethanoic acid
 explain why ethanoic acid is a weak acid
  give examples of reactions to show that ethanoic  
acid is a typical acid
  describe the reaction of ethanoic acid with an alcohol, and name the products that form

--- Page 262 ---
Organic chemistry
2613 Answer these questions about the alkanes.
 a
 Which two elements do alkanes contain?
 b
  Which alkane is the main compound in 
 
natural gas?
 c
  After butane, the next two alkanes in the series 
are 
pentane and hexane. How many carbon 
atoms are there in a molecule of:
  
i
 
pentane?
  
 ii
 hexane?
 d
 W
ill pentane react with bromine water? Explain.
 e
 Alkanes burn in a good supply of oxygen.
 
 Name the gases formed when they burn.
 f
  W
rite the word equation for the complete 
combustion of pentane in oxygen.
 g
  Name a harmful substance formed during incomplete
 combustion of pentane in air.
4
 When ethanol vapour is passed over heated aluminium oxide, a dehydration reaction occurs, and the gas ethene is produced.
 a
  Draw a diagram of suitable apparatus for carrying out this reaction in the lab.
 b
 What is meant by a 
dehydration reaction?
 c
  W
rite an equation for this reaction, using the  
structural formulae.
 d
 i
  What will you see if the gas that forms is bubbled through bromine water?
  
ii
  Y
ou will not see this if ethanol vapour is 
passed through bromine water. Why not?
5
 a
  Which of these could be used as monomers for addition polymers? Explain your choice.
  
i
 ethene, CH25CH2
  ii  ethanol, C2H5OH
  
iii
 propane, C3H8
  iv styrene, C6H5CH5CH2
  v chloropropene, CH3CH5CHCl
 b
 Suggest a name for each polymer obtained.
Extended curriculum
6 The saturated hydrocarbons form a homologous series with the general formula C
nH2n 1 2.
 a
 What is a 
homologous series?
 b
 Explain what the term 
saturated means.
 c
 Name the series described above.
 d
 i
  Give the formula and name for a member of this series with two carbon atoms.
  
ii
 Draw its structural formula.
 e
 i
  Name a homologous series of 
unsaturated 
hydrocarbons, and give its general formula.
  
ii
  Give the formula and name for 
the member  
of this series with two carbon atoms.
  
iii
  Draw the structural formula for the 
compound.7
 Ethanol is a member of a homologous series.
 a
  Give two general characteristics of a homologous series.
 b
 i
 Which homologous series is ethanol part of?
  
ii
 What is the general formula for the series?
  iii
 What does 
functional group mean?
  
iv
  What is the functional group in ethanol’
s 
homologous series?
 c
 W
rite down the formula of ethanol.
 d
 i
  Draw the structural formula for the fifth member of the series, pentan-1-ol. 
  
ii
  Draw the structural formula for an isomer 
 
of pentan-1-ol.
  
iii
  Describe how pent-1-ene could be made from pentan-1-ol.
  
iv
  Name the organic product formed when pentan-1-ol is oxidised using acidified potassium manganate(VII). 
8
 Ethanoic acid is a member of the homologous series with 
the general formula CnH2nO2.
 a
 Name this series
.
 b
 What is the functional group of the series?
 c
  Ethanoic acid is a 
weak acid. Explain what this 
means, using an equation to help you.
 d
 Ethanoic acid reacts with carbonates.
  
i
 What would you 
see during this reaction?
  
ii
  W
rite a balanced equation for the reaction 
with sodium carbonate.
 e
 i
  Name the member of the series for which 
 
n 5 3, and draw its structural formula.
  
ii
  Give the equation for the reaction between this compound and sodium hydroxide.
9
 Ethanoic acid reacts with ethanol in the presence of concentrated sulfuric acid.
 a
 Name the organic product formed.
 b
 Which type of compound is it?
 c
 How could you tell quickly that it had formed?
 d
 What is the function of the sulfuric acid?
 e
 The reaction is 
reversible. What does this mean?
 f
 W
rite an equation for the reaction.
10
 Hex-1-ene is an unsaturated hydrocarbon. It melts at 
2140°
 
C and boils at 63°
 
C. Its empirical formula 
is CH2. Its relative molecular mass is 84.
 a
 i
  T
o which family does hex-1-ene belong?
  
ii
 What is its molecular formula?
 b
 i
  Hex-1-ene reacts with bromine water
. Write 
an equation to show this reaction.
  
ii
 What is this type of reaction called?
  
iii
 What would you 
see during the reaction?

--- Page 263 ---
18.1
What is a polymer?
A polymer is any substance containing very large molecules, formed 
when lots of small molecules join together.
For example, look what happens when ethene molecules join:
The reaction that took place is: 
The drawing shows six ethene molecules adding together. In fact  
many thousands add together, giving molecules with very long chains.  These very large molecules are called macromolecules. 
A polymer is a substance made of macromolecules.The polymer made from ethene is called poly(ethene) or polythene.  
Poly- means many. The reaction is called a polymerisation.
In a polymerisation reaction, thousands of small molecules join to 
give macromolecules. The small molecules are called monomers. The product is called a polymer.
Synthetic polymers
Polythene is a synthetic polymer. Synthetic means it is made in a factory. Other synthetic polymers include nylon, Terylene, lycra, chewing gum, and plastics such as polystyrene and perspex. Hair gels and shower gels contain water-soluble polymers.
H
CC
H
H HHHHHHHHHHHHH
CCCCCCCCCCCCH
HH
CC
HHHH
CC
HHHH
CC
HHHH
CC
HHHH
CC
HHH
HHHHHHHHHHethene molecules (monomers)
part of a polythene
molecule(a polymer)polymerisation
This test tube contains ethene gas. 
When ethene is heated to 50
 °C, at 
 
a few atmospheres pressure, and over a special catalyst …… it turns into a liquid that cools to a waxy white solid. This is found to contain very long molecules, made by the ethene molecules joining.And it is really useful. It can be used to make toys, dustbins, tables and chairs, water pipes, buckets, crates, washing-up bowls and so on.
 Hair gel: a water-soluble polymer . 
When you put it on, the water in it 
evaporates so the gel gets stiff.Polymers
262
Introducing polymers

--- Page 264 ---
Starch is a polymer made by 
plants. The starch molecules are built from molecules of glucose,  a sugar. We eat plenty of starch in rice, bread, and potatoes.Plants also use glucose to make another polymer called cellulose. Cotton T-shirts and denim jeans are almost pure cellulose, made by the cotton plant.Your skin, hair, nails, bones and muscles are mostly polymers, made of macromolecules called proteins. Your body builds these up from amino acids.
 W ood: over 75% cellulose. 
This wood may end up as paper.Natural polymers
Polythene was first made in 1935. But for billions of years, nature has 
been busy making natural polymers. Look at these examples:
The wood in trees is about 50% cellulose. Paper is made from wood pulp, 
so this book is mainly cellulose. The polymer in your hair and nails, and in wool and silk, and animal horns and claws, is called keratin.  The polymer in your skin and bones is called collagen.
So – you contain polymers, you eat polymers, you wear polymers, and you 
use polymers. Polymers play a big part in your life!
The reactions that produce polymers
All polymers, natural and synthetic, consist of macromolecules, formed by small molecules joined together.
But these macromolecules are not all made in the same way. There are 
two types of reaction: addition polymerisation and condensation polymerisation. You can find out more about these in the next two units. 
Q
1 What is:
 a
 a macr
omolecule?
 b
 a polymer?
 c
 a natural polymer?
 d
 a synthetic polymer?
 e
 
polymerisation?2 Name the natural polymer found in:
 a
 your hair
    
b
 this book
3 Name at least thr ee items you own, that are made of 
polymers. 
263Polymers

--- Page 265 ---
18.2
Another look at the polymerisation of ethene
Here again is the reaction that produces polythene:
The reaction can be shown in a short form like this: 
where n stands for a large number. It could be many thousands.  
The catalyst for the reaction is usually a mixture of titanium and aluminium compounds. 
It’s an addition reaction
The reaction above takes place because the double bonds in ethene break, allowing the molecules to add on to each other. So this is called addition polymerisation. In addition polymerisation, double bonds in molecules break and  the molecules add on to each other.
The monomer
The small starting molecules in a polymerisation are called monomers.  In the reaction above, ethene is the monomer.  For addition polymerisation to take place, the monomers must have C=C double bonds.
The chain lengths in polythene
In polythene, all the macromolecules are long chains of carbon atoms, with hydrogen atoms attached. So they are all similar. But they are not all identical. The chains are not all the same length. That is why we can’t write an exact formula for polythene.
By changing the reaction conditions, the average chain length can be 
changed. But the chains will never be all the same length.
The relative atomic mass (M
r) of an ethene molecule is 28.  
The average Mr of the macromolecules in a sample of polyethene can be 
500 000 or more. In other words, when making polythene, at least 17 000 
ethene molecules join, on average!H
CC
H
H HHHHHHHHHHHHH
CCCCCCCCCCCCH
HH
CC
HHHH
CC
HHHH
CC
HHHH
CC
HHHH
CC
HHH
HHHHHHHHHHethene molecules (monomers)
part of a polythene
molecule(a polymer)polymerisation
heat, pressure,
a catalystn
nH
HCH
HC HH H
HCC
 Polythene for packaging is made and 
sold as pellets like these. Later they will 
be heated to soften or melt them, and tur
ned into plastic bottles and bags.
 T o make a bottle, polythene pellets are melted. A little molten polymer is fed into a mould. A jet of air forces it into the shape of the mould. Then the mould is opened – and out comes a bottle!Polymers
264
Addition polymerisation

--- Page 266 ---
H
CC
ClH
H nH
HCH
ClC
F F
FCC
FFFFFFFFF
FFFFFFFFCCCCCCCC
nF
FCF
FCHHHHHHHHH
Cl HCCCCCCCCC
HHHHHHH Cl Cl Cl HH H
ClCC n
H
HC6H5
HCCC6H5C6H5C6H5C6H5
H HHHHH HHH H
CCCCCCCC6H5
HHH
nC6H5
HH
HCC nFF F
FCC nThe monomer
chloroethene
(vinyl chloride)poly(chloroethene) orpolyvinyl chloride (PVC)
tetraﬂuoroethene poly(tetraﬂuoroethene) or Teﬂon
phenylethene(styrene)poly(phenylethene) orpoly(styrene)n stands for a large number!Part of the polymer molecule The equation for the reaction
CC
 PVC is light and flexible so is widely 
used for hoses and water pipes, and as 
an insulating cover for electrical wiring.
 CH3 CH3 CH3 CH3
HH HHHHH HHH HH
CCCCCCCCCH3
HH
HCC
This shows part of a molecule of 
poly(propene). The unit within brackets is the repeating unit.So this is the monomer that was used. It is the alkene propene. Note the C=C double bond.Making other polymers by addition
Look at the polymers in this table. You have probably heard of them all.  They are all made by addition polymerisation. Compare them:
Identifying the monomer
If you know the structure of the addition polymer, you can work out what the monomer was.
 
Like this:
  Identify the repeating unit. (It has two carbon atoms side by side, in the main chain.) Y
ou could draw brackets around it.
  Then draw the unit, but put a double bond between the two carbon atoms. That is the monomer
. 
For example:
Q
1 Why was addition polymerisation given that name?
2 a What is a monomer?
 b
  Could methane (CH4) be used as a monomer for addition 
polymerisation?
 
Explain your answer.
3 It is not possible to give an exact formula for the 
macr
omolecules in polythene. Why not?4 Draw a diagram to show the polymerisation of:
 a
 
ethene
    
b
 
chloroethene
    
c
 
phenylethene 
5 A polymer has the general formula  
shown on the right. 
 Draw the monomer that was used 
 
to make it.H
HCH
COCH3C
n
265Polymers

--- Page 267 ---
18.3
Condensation polymerisation  
In addition polymerisation, there is only one monomer.  
Double bonds break, allowing the monomer molecules to join together. But in condensation polymerisation, no double bonds break. Instead:
  two different monomers join. 
  each has two functional groups that take part in the reaction.
  the monomers join at their functional groups, by getting rid of or 
eliminating small molecules.
Let’s look at two examples.
1 Making n ylon
Below are the two monomers used in making nylon. We will call them  A and B, for convenience:
A has an NH
2 group at each end. B has a COCl group at each end.  
Only these functional groups take part in the reaction.  
So we can show the rest of the molecules as blocks, for simplicity.
The reaction
This shows the reaction between the two monomer molecules: 
So the nitrogen atom at one end of A has joined to the carbon atom at  
one end of B, by eliminating a molecule of hydrogen chloride. 
The reaction continues at the other ends of A and B.  In this way, thousands 
of molecules join, giving a macromolecule of nylon. Here is part of it: 
The group where the monomers joined is called the amide linkage. So 
nylon is called a polyamide. (Proteins have this link too, as you will see.)
Nylon can be drawn into tough strong fibres that do not rot away. So it is 
used for thread, ropes, fishing nets, car seat belts, and carpets.HHHHHH
H HCCCCCCNH
HH
N
H HHHH
A 1,6-diaminohexaneHHHH
H HCCCCCO
ClO
ClC
HH
B  hexan-1,6-dioyl chloride
NH
HH
N
HCO
ClO
ClC +
AB+ NHHO
ClC HClO
HNC
Then another B
reacts here ...... and another Areacts here ... and so on.HCl is
lost
CO
HNCO
CO
HN
HN CO
HNthis linking group of atoms
is called an amide linkage
 Making nylon in the school lab.  
A is dissolved in water. B is dissolved  
in an organic solvent that does not mix with water. Nylon forms where the solutions meet. 
 Nylon thr ead: tough, strong, great 
for flying kites.contains A
contains BPolymers
266
Condensation polymerisation 

--- Page 268 ---
H HCCCC O O
OH HOCC CCH H
Cl HHH
HO
C  benzene-1,4-dicarboxylic acid D  ethane-1,2-diolCC OH
CO O
OHC
OHCO O
OHHO OH+
CD+ OH H2O CO
Then another D
reacts here ...... and another C
reacts here ... and so on. H2O is
lost
OO
OO
C O C OO
CO
Cthis group is called 
an ester linkage
 Fibr es of nylon and Terylene are 
made by pumping the melted polymer through a spinneret (like a shower head). As it comes out through the holes, the polymer hardens into long threads. 
 Shirts made fr om Terylene woven 
with cotton.2 Making T erylene
Like nylon, Terylene is made by condensation polymerisation, using two 
different monomers. This time we call them C and D:
C has two COOH (carboxyl) groups, and D has two OH (alcohol) groups.
Only these functional groups take part in the reaction.  So once again we can show the rest of the molecules as blocks. 
The reaction
This shows the reaction between the two monomer molecules:
So a carbon atom at one end of C has joined to an oxygen atom at one end 
of D, by eliminating a water molecule. 
The reaction continues at the other ends of C  and D . In this way thousands 
of molecules join, giving a macromolecule of Terylene. Here is part of it: 
In fact the reaction is the same as the reaction between the acid and 
alcohol on page 259, giving an ester. (See the last section on that page.)
So the group where the monomers have joined is called an ester linkage. 
Terylene is called a polyester.
Terylene is used for shirts and other clothing, and for bedlinen. It is usually 
woven with cotton. The resulting fabric is more hard-wearing than cotton, and does not crease so easily. Terylene is also sold as polyester thread.
Q
1 How many pr oducts are there, in condensation 
polymerisation?
2 In condensation polymerisation, each monomer molecule 
must have 
two functional groups. Explain why. 
3 List the dif ferences between condensation and addition 
polymerisation. 4 a  Draw a diagram to show the r eaction that produces 
nylon. (You can show the carbon chains as blocks.) 
 b
 Cir
cle the amide linkage in your drawing.
 c
 Nylon is called a 
polyamide. Why?
5 Draw part of a T erylene macromolecule in a simple way, 
using blocks as above. Circle the ester linkage.
267Polymers

--- Page 269 ---
18.4
Plastics are synthetic polymers
Synthetic polymers are usually called plastics. (Plastic means can be 
moulded into shape without breaking, and this is true of all synthetic polymers while they are being made.) But when they are used in fabrics, and for thread, we still call them synthetic polymers.
Most plastics are made from chemicals found in the naphtha fraction of 
petroleum (pages 247 and 249). They are usually quite cheap to make. 
The properties of plastics
Most plastics have these properties:1
 They do not usually conduct electricity or heat.
2
  They are unreactive. Most are not af
fected by air, water, acids, or other 
chemicals. This means they are usually safe for storing things in, including food.
3
  They are usually light to carry – much lighter than wood, or stone, or glass, or most metals.
4
  They don’
t break when you drop them. You have to hammer most rigid 
plastics quite hard, to get them to break. 
5
  They are strong. This is because their long molecules are attracted to each other
. Most plastics are hard to tear or pull apart.
6
  They do not catch fire easily
. But when you heat them, some soften  
and melt, and some char (go black as if burned).
Changing the properties
By choosing monomers and reaction conditions carefully, you can make plastics with exactly the properties you want. For example, look at how you can change the properties of polythene:
The high-density polythene is hard and strong, which is why it is used for 
things like bowls and dustbins. The low-density polythene is ideal for things like plastic bags, and ‘cling film’ for wrapping food. a pair of polymer molecules
as molecules get longer, the force of 
attraction between them increases
At about 50  °C, 3 or 4 atmospheres 
pressure, and using a catalyst, you 
get long chains like these. They are packed close together so the polythene is quite 
dense.At about 200  °C, 2000 atmospheres 
pressure, and with a little oxygen present, the chains will branch. Now they can’
t pack closely, so the 
polythene is far less dense.
So by choosing the right conditions, you can change the density of the polythene, and make it ‘heavy’ or ‘light’ to suit your needs.
 A synthetic polymer for sewing. (It is 
polyester
.)Polymers
268
Making use of synthetic polymers

--- Page 270 ---
Uses for synthetic polymers
Given all those great properties, it is not surprising that plastics have 
thousands of uses. Here are some examples.
Polymer Examples of uses
polythene plastic bags and gloves, clingfilm (low density)  
mugs, bowls, chairs, dustbins (high density)
polychloroethene (PVC) water pipes, wellingtons, hoses, covering for  
electricity cables 
polypropene crates, ropes
polystyrene used as expanded polystyrene in fast-food cartons, packaging, and insulation for roofs and walls (to keep homes warm)
Teflon coated on frying pans to make them non-stick, fabric protector, windscreen wipers, flooring 
nylon ropes, fishing nets and lines, tents, curtains
Terylene clothing (especially mixed with cotton), thread
 Polystyr ene is an insulator: it helps to prevent heat loss.  
So it is used under floors, and in fast-food cartons.  T eflon – a slippery polymer. It is used to coat irons to help 
them glide, and on frying pans to stop food sticking.
Q
1 Look at the pr operties of plastics, on page 268.  
Which three properties do you think are the most  
important for:
 a
 plastic bags?
 b
 kitchen bowls and utensils?
 c
 water pipes?
 d
 fishing nets?
 e
 hair dryers?
 f
 polystyr
ene fast-food containers? 
2 What is low-density polythene, and how is it made?
3 T eflon is used to coat frying pans, to make them non-stick.
 So what pr
operties do you think Teflon has?
 
List them. 
4 a What is expanded polystyrene?
 b
 Give thr
ee uses of this material.5 a Now make a table with these headings:
  Item Properties of 
the plastic in itDisadvantages 
of this plasticName of this plastic
 b
 i
  Fill in the first column of your table, giving thr
ee or 
four plastic items you own or use. 
  
ii
  In the second column, give the pr
operties you 
observe, for that plastic. (You are a scientist!)  
For example is the plastic rigid?
 
Or flexible?
  
iii
  In the thir
d column give any disadvantages you notice, 
for this plastic.
  
iv
 Then see if you can name it. If you can, well done!
 Another use of nylon: for parasails 
like this one, and parachutes.
269Polymers

--- Page 271 ---
18.5
Plastics: the problem
There were only a few plastics around before the 1950s. Since then, 
dozens of new ones have been developed, and more are on the way. 
Now it is hard to imagine life without them. They are used everywhere. One big reason for their success is their unreactivity. But this is also a 
problem. They do not break down or rot away. Most of the plastics thrown out in the last 50 years are still around – and may still be here 50 years from now. A mountain of waste plastic is growing.
Polythene: the biggest problem
Polythene is the biggest problem. It is the most-used plastic in the world, thanks to its use in plastic bags and food packaging. Around 5 trillion polythene bags are made every year. (That’s 5 million million.) Most are used only once or twice, then thrown away. 
In many places, rubbish is collected and brought to landfill sites. The 
plastic bags fill up these sites. In other places, rubbish is not collected.  So the plastic bags lie around and cause many problems. For example:
  they choke birds, fish and other animals that try to eat them.  
Or they fill up the animals’ stomachs so that they cannot eat proper food, and starve to death. (Animals cannot digest plastics.)
  they clog up drains, and sewers, and cause flooding.
  they collect in rivers, and get in the way of fish. Some river beds now contain a thick layer of plastic.
  they blow into trees and onto beaches. So the place looks a mess. T
ourists are put off – and many places depend on tourists.
Because of these problems, plastic bags have been banned in many places. For example in Bangladesh, Rwanda and several states in India.
 A stomach full of plastic means the bir d will starve to death.    Nice for visitors …
 Plastic bags – her e today, still here 
tomorrow …Polymers
270
Plastics: here to stay?

--- Page 272 ---
 A degradeable plastic bag: it will 
br
eak down along with the vegetable 
peelings and scrap paper inside.
 This little cr ess plant has been genetically modified 
to produce a plastic in its cells.Recycling plastics
Some waste plastics do get reused. For example:
  some are melted down and made into new plastic bags, and things  
like soles for shoes, and fleeces.
  some are melted and their long chains cracked, to make small 
molecules that can be polymerised into new plastics.
  some are burned, and the heat is used to produce electricity .
But only a small % of waste plastic is reused in these ways. One problem is the many different types of plastic. These must be separated before reusing them, but that is not easy to do. Burning also poses problems, since some plastics give off poisonous gases.
Degradeable plastics
Degradeable polythene is already here. Some is biodegradeable: it contains additives such as starch that bacteria can feed on. Some is photodegradeable: it containts additives that break down in sunlight. In both cases, the result is that the polythene breaks down into tiny flakes. 
The amount of additive can be varied for different purposes – for example 
to make rubbish sacks that will break down within weeks.
Q
1 Describe some negative ef fects of plastics on the 
environment.
2 Polythene is r esponsible for most of the environmental 
problems caused by plastics. Explain why.3 Explain what these ar e, in your own words:
 a
 photodegradable polythene
   
b
 bio-polymers
4 See if you can come up with some ideas, to help pr event 
pollution by plastic bags.Bio-polymers: the future?
In future, the plastics you use could be bio-polymers – grown inside plants, or made in tanks by bacteria.
For example, one strain of bacteria can feed on sugar 
from crops such as maize, to produce polyesters. 
Plants that can make plastics in their cells have already 
been developed. When the plants are harvested, the plastic is extracted using a solvent. Then the solvent  is evaporated.
Work on bio-polymers is still at an early stage. But 
when oil runs out, we will be glad of bio-polymers. And they have two advantages for the environment: they are a renewable resource, and biodegradeable.
271Polymers

--- Page 273 ---
18.6
CO2
chlorophyll (the
green pigmentin leaves)
H
2O and
minerals
 A plant: a natural chemical factory.
1 Animals eat plants, and seeds of  
plants. They digest them, and 
build their own carbohydrates, proteins, and fats from them.2
  Y ou eat animal carbohydrates, 
proteins, and fats, in animal produce such as eggs, milk, and cheese.
5
 … and things like bread and 
pasta, made from plant products.4
 Y
ou also eat parts of plants.  
For example maize, rice, potatoes 
and other vegetables, and fruit, …3
 Y
ou eat them in meat and 
fish too.
6
 During digestion, you break 
the macromolecules 
back down 
to their building blocks. You use 
some for energy, and the rest to build up new carbohydrates, proteins, and fats.We will now look more closely at the carbohydrates, proteins, and fats that plants produce, in this unit and the next one.Polymers
272
The macromolecules in food (part I)
What’s in your food?
No matter what kind of food you eat, its main ingredients are the same: carbohydrates, proteins and fats. All three are made of macromolecules. And plants can produce them all.
Plants: the polymer factories
1  Plants take in carbon dioxide from the air, and water from the soil.
2
  Using energy from sunlight, and 
chlorophyll as a catalyst, they turn 
them into glucose and oxygen, in a process called photosynthesis:
  
6CO2 (g) 1  6H2O (l)  C6H12O6 (s) 1  6O2 (g)
  
 carbon
  water
  glucose
  oxygen
 
   dioxide
    (a sugar)
3
  Then they turn the glucose molecules into macromolecules of starch and cellulose, by polymerisation. These natural polymers are called carbohydrates
. Plants use cellulose to build stems and other 
structures. They use starch as an energy store.
4
  Using glucose, and minerals from the soil, they also produce macromolecules of 
proteins and fats.
 
Enzymes in plant cells act as catalysts, for the reactions in 
3 and 4. 
From plants to you
This is how the macromolecules from plants reach you:

--- Page 274 ---
Carbohydrates
Carbohydrates contain just carbon, hydrogen and oxygen.  
Glucose is called a simple carbohydrate. It is also called  a monosaccharide, which means a single sugar unit.
The structure of a glucose molecule is shown on the right.  
Now let’s see how glucose molecules join:
In reaction 2, two molecules join, eliminating a small molecule (water).  
So it is a condensation reaction. Reaction 3 is a condensation polymerisation, so starch is a polymer.
Cellulose
Cellulose is also a polysaccharide. Its molecules are built from at least 1000 glucose units. But they are joined differently than those in starch,  so cellulose has quite different properties. 
The cell walls in plants are made of cellulose. So we eat cellulose every 
time we eat cereals, vegetables, and fruit. We can’t digest it, but it helps  to clean out our digestive systems. We call it fibre. HHH
H
CCOH
H
HOCH
OHC
OHCOH
HCO
 A molecule of glucose, C6H12O6.
 It can do something we can't do:  
digest cellulose. Grass is mainly cellulose.1 W e can draw a glucose 
molecule like this, showing the two groups that react:2
  T wo glucose molecules 
can join like this, giving maltose, a disaccharide:3
  Hundreds or thousands can join in the same 
way, giving starch, a complex carbohydrate.  It is also called a polysaccharide: 
HO OH
HO OH OHO OH HO
water molecule
eliminated
O O O OHO OH HO OH HO OH HO OH
water moleculeseliminated
Q
1 All life depends on photosynthesis. Explain why .
2 Explain what it is, and name one example:
 a
 a carbohydrate
 b
 a monosaccharide
 c
 a disaccharide
 d
 a polysaccharide3 In what ways is cellulose:
 a
 like star
ch?
    
b
 dif
ferent from starch?
4  The cellulose in vegetables is good for us. Why?
5 Name thr ee foods you eat, that are rich in starch.The importance of carbohydrates
Your body can digest starch. It breaks it back down  
to glucose. It uses some of this for respiration, which provides you with energy (page 235). 
It builds the rest into a complex carbohydrate called 
glycogen, which acts as an energy store. 
So carbohydrates are an important part of your diet. 
Rice, wheat, pasta, potatoes, and bananas are all rich in starch. Honey and fruit juices are rich in glucose. 
 Befor e races, marathon runners eat plenty of 
carbohydrate to build up their glycogen levels.
273Polymers

--- Page 275 ---
18.7
Proteins – built from amino acids
Proteins are polymers, built up from molecules of amino acids.  
Amino acids contain carbon, hydrogen, oxygen, and nitrogen, and some contain sulfur. The general structure of an amino acid molecule is shown on the right. Note the COOH and NH
2 functional groups. 
There are twenty common amino acids. Here are three of them – with the COOH bonds drawn vertically, to help you see how the amino acids join: 
How amino acids join up to make proteins
This shows four different amino acids combining:
From 60 to 6000 amino acid units can join to make a macromolecule of 
protein. They can be different amino acids, joined in different orders – so there are a huge number of proteins! 
The reaction is a condensation polymerisation, with loss of water 
molecules. Note the amide linkage, as in nylon (page 266).
The importance of proteins in your food 
When your body digests food, it breaks the proteins back down to  amino acids. These then join up again to make proteins your body needs.  For example all these substances in your body are proteins:
  the enzymes that act as catalysts for reactions in your body cells
  the collagen in your skin, bones, and teeth
  the keratin that forms your hair
  haemoglobin, the red substance in blood, that carries oxygen
  hormones, the chemicals that dictate how you grow and develop.
Y
our body needs all 20 amino acids to make these proteins. It can make  
11 by itself. But there are 9 essential amino acids that it cannot make.  To be healthy, you must eat foods that can provide these.H
HC N HO
OHC
HH
CH3C NO
OHC H
HH
C3H7C NO
OHC H
H
glycine alanine cysteine
H
RC NO
OHC H
HH
RC NO
OHC H
H RC N
OHC H
HH
RC NO
OHC H
H
H
RC NO
C
HH
RC NO
C
HH
RC NO
C
HH
RC N
Hwater molecules
eliminatedthe amide linkage
as in nylonH
RC NO
OHC H
H
 An amino acid is a carboxylic acid 
with an amino (NH2) group. R stands  
for the rest of the molecule.
 Pr oteins are large and complex.  
The chains are often coiled. The genes in the cells of plants and animals control which amino acids join up, and in what order. 

 
Proteins from animals usually have all 
20 amino acids. So do those from soya 
beans. But in other plant proteins, some essential amino acids are often missing. 
!Rich in proteins
chicken and other meats
fishcheeseyoghurtmilk eggssoya beanslentilsbeans and peasspinachnutsseeds (such as sunflower seeds)Polymers
274
The macromolecules in food (part II)

--- Page 276 ---
 Making palm oil. She will crush the 
boiled palm fruit to r
elease the oil, and 
use it for cooking. Palm oil is a mixture 
of esters, mainly from palmitic acid.Fats
Foods also contain natural fats and oils (liquid fats). 
Complex carbohydrates, and proteins, are polymers. But fats are not made 
by polymerisation, so they are not polymers. They are esters: compounds formed from an alcohol and an acid. 
  The alcohol is always glycerol, a natural alcohol with three OH groups. 
(Its chemical name is propan-1,2,3-triol.) 
  The acids are natural carboxylic acids, usually with long carbon chains.  
They are called fatty acids. For example palmitic acid, C15H31COOH. 
How fats are formed
This shows the reaction between glycerol and a fatty acid. R stands for the long chain of carbon atoms with hydrogen atoms attached, in the acid:
This is a condensation reaction, with the elimination of water. Each OH 
group in a glycerol molecule can react with a different fatty acid, so you can get many different esters. Note the ester linkage, as in Terylene (page 267).
The importance of fats in your food
In your body, fats and oils in food are broken down to fatty acids and glycerol. Some of these are used for energy. Some are combined into new fats, to make the membranes in your body cells. Some cells also store fat droplets. These cells form a layer under your skin, which keeps you warm.
So you need some fats in your diet. But runny unsaturated fats 
(containing carbon–carbon double bonds) are better for you than the hard, saturated, fats found in meat and cheese. Saturated fats have been linked to heart disease.HO CH2
CH2 HOHO    CHRCO
OH
RCO
OH
RCOOH- 3H2ORCO
OCH2
RCO
OCH
RCO
OCH2this group is
called anester linkage+
 3 molecules  1  1 molecule   1 macromolecule
 of a fatty acid
  of glycerol
  of a fatHO     CH2
CH2 HOHO     CH
glycerol
Q
1 What is:   a  an amino acid?   b  a pr otein?
2 Describe in your own wor ds a protein macromolecule.
3 Give thr ee examples of the important roles proteins play in 
your body.
4 Name six foods that ar e rich in protein.5 Show how palmitic acid r eacts with propan-1,2,3-triol  
to give an ester found in palm oil.
6 What happens to fats when you eat them?
7 Compar e the reactions that produce carbohydrates, 
proteins, and fats. What do they have in common? Fish oil and vegetable oils contain 
unsaturated fats. These ar
e better for 
you than saturated fats. 
!Rich in fats
meat
oily fishbutter, cheese, creamavocadosnuts and seedsvegetable oils (such as palm oil,  
  
olive oil, sunflower oil) 
margarine and other spreads A molecule of glycer ol.
275Polymers

--- Page 277 ---
18.8
 The hydr olysis of starch starts in your 
mouth, where the enzyme amylase in 
saliva start breaking it down.
 Getting r eady for hydrolysis.
 All the macr omolecules will be 
broken down, with help from enzymes.Polymers
276
Breaking down the macromolecules
What happens during digestion?
You saw earlier how the natural macromolecules in food were built up  
by condensation reactions, with the loss of water molecules. 
The opposite happens when you eat them. In your mouth, stomach and 
small intestine, the macromolecules are broken down again, by reacting with water. This is called hydrolysis.
Hydrolysis is a reaction in which molecules are broken down by 
reaction with water. 
Hydrolysis in the digestive system
This is what happens in your body, during digestion:
  Starch  and any disaccharides get broken down to glucose. Your cells 
then use the glucose to provide energy, in a process called respiration. It is the reverse of photosynthesis: 
 C6H12O6 (aq)  1  6O2 (g)  6CO2 (g) 1  6H2O (l) 1  energy 
 
glucose
 1
 
oxygen
  carbon  1  water  1  energy 
   
   dioxide
  Proteins  get broken down to amino acids which your body then uses 
to build up the proteins it needs. 
  Fats  and oils (which are esters) get broken down into glycerol and 
fatty acids. These are used for energy, or to make new fats for cell membranes, or to be stored. 
All the ‘breaking down’ reactions during digestion are hydrolyses. 
Example: hydrolysis of an ester during digestion 
This shows the hydrolysis of an ester in a vegetable oil, in your digestive system. R represents long chains of carbon atoms:
H    OH
H OH
H OH   3R CO
OHRCO
OC H2
RCO
OC H
RCO
OC H2++an enzyme
as catalystHO CH2
HO CH
HO CH2
an ester in a  
vegetable oilwater fatty acid glycerol
Compare it with the reaction shown on page 275. What do you notice?
Enzymes as catalysts
Enzymes act as catalysts, in building up the macromolecules in food.   
In digestion, other enzymes act as catalysts to break them down again. (Look at the hydrolysis above.) Enzymes called amylases act on starch, lipases act on fats and oils, and proteinases act on proteins.

--- Page 278 ---
 Sodium salts that keep you clean!Hydrolysis in the lab
You can also carry out hydrolysis of starch, proteins and fats in the lab. 
This table shows the conditions, and the results for complete hydrolysis.
The soap you buy may be made from vegetable oil – like palm oil or 
coconut oil – or even from fish oil or animal fat. Chemicals are added to make it 
smell nice. These are usually artificial esters. (As you saw on page 259, many esters 
have attractive smells.) Note that:
  the products are the same as for digestion, except for fats, where  
you obtain sodium salts of the fatty acids.
  the hydrolyses in your digestive system take place in much milder 
conditions, at much lower temperatures, thanks to enzymes.
  if the hydrolysis of starch and proteins is not complete, you will obtain 
a mixture of molecules of different sizes. Partial hydrolysis of starch can give glucose, maltose (made of two glucose units), maltotriose (three glucose units), and dextrins (many glucose units).
You can use paper chromatography to identify the products of the hydrolyses, as shown in Unit 2.5. They are colourless, so you need to use locating agents.
Making soap from fats and oils
The sodium salts of fatty acids are used as soap. So soap is made in factories by boiling fats and oils with sodium hydroxide, as above. For example:Macromolecule Conditions for the hydrolysis Complete hydrolysis gives …
starch heat with dilute hydrochloric acid glucose 
proteins boil with 6M hydrochloric acid for 24 hours amino acids
fats boil with dilute sodium hydroxide glycerol plus the sodium salts of the fatty acids  
(R2COO
 2 Na 1)
Q
1 a What does hydrolysis mean? 
 b
  See if you can draw a diagram to show
 that the complete 
hydrolysis of starch to glucose, in the lab, is the opposite 
of a condensation polymerisation.
 c
  If you carry out an incomplete hydr
olysis of starch in the 
lab, you get a mixture of products. Explain.2 Hydr olysis of a protein in the lab will give a mixture of 
products. Explain why, and how to identify them.
3 Oils ar e broken down in your digestive system. And oils are 
used to make soaps, in industry. 
 a
 What do these two pr
ocesses have in common?
 b
 In what way ar
e they different? 
277Polymers
++ 3RCOONa (aq) 3NaOH (aq)HO CH2
HO CH
HO CH2(l) (l)R CH2
R CH
R CH2COO
COOCOO
an ester in a
vegetable oilglycerol soap – the sodiumsalt of a fatty acid

--- Page 279 ---
Checkup on Chapter 18
Questions
Extended curriculum
1  This diagram represents two units of an  addition 
polymer called polyacrylamide:
H
CONH2 HCCCC
HH H H
HCONH2
 a Draw the structure of the monomer .
 b
 Suggest a name for the monomer
.
 c
 Is the monomer saturated, or unsaturated? 
2
 The polymer ‘T
eflon’ is obtained from the monomer 
tetrafluoroethene, which has this structure:
F FFF
CC
 a  Which feature of the monomer makes 
polymerisation possible?
 b
 Which type of polymerisation occurs?
 c
  Draw three units in the structure of the macromolecule that forms.
 d
 Give th
e chemical name for this polymer.
3
 The polymer poly(dichloroethene) has been used to make ‘cling film', for covering food to keep it fresh. This shows the structure of the polymer:
nH
HC
ClCl
C
 a What does n represent?
 b
  Name the monomer
, and draw its structural 
formula.
 c
 Which type of polymerisation takes place? 
 d
  One property of poly(dichlorothene) is its 
low 
permeability to moisture and gases. 
  
i
  See if you can explain what the term in 
italics means.
  
ii
  
That property is important in keeping food fresh. Why?
  
iii
  Give three other 
physical properties a 
polymer would need, to be suitable for use as 'cling film'.
 e
 Poly(dichloroethene) is 
non-biodegradable. 
  
i
 Explain the term in italics.
  
ii
  Describe two environmental problems caused by the disposal of such plastics.Revision checklist
Extended curriculum
Make sure you can …
 explain these terms:
 
monomer
 polymer
 polymerisation 
 macromolecule
 natural polymer
 synthetic polymer
 d escribe addition polymerisation, and
 
–
 say what the key feature of the monomer is 
 
–
  draw part of a polymer molecule, formed from
  
a given monomer 
 
–
 identify the monomer
, for a given polymer 
 name at least three polymers formed by addition  
polymerisation, and give uses for them 
 describe condensation polymerisation , and
 
–
 say what the key features of the monomers are 
 
–
  state the dif
ferences between condensation and 
addition polymerisation
 draw simple diagrams to show the monomers,  
and part of the macromolecule, for:
 nylon
             Terylene
 using blocks to represent carbon chains 
 explain what the amide and ester linkages are,  
and identify them on a drawing
 give uses for nylon and T erylene
 give at least five general properties of plastics
 describe some of the environmental problems caused by plastics 
 name and describe the three main groups of 
macromolecules in food
 explain what these are:
 amino acids
 fatty acids
 glycerol
 esters
 draw simple diagrams to show how these are   
formed by condensation polymerisation:
 starch
              proteins
 draw a simple diagram to show how fats are formed by a condensation reaction
 explain what hydrolysis is
 describe the products, when starch, proteins, and   
fats are broken down in your digestive system
 describe how the hydrolysis of starch, proteins, and  
fats is carried out in the lab, and name the products of complete hydrolysis 
 describe how to carry out paper chromatography to identify products of hydrolysis
 explain how fats and oils are used to make soapsPolymers
278


--- Page 280 ---
4 Polyamides  are polymers made by condensation 
polymerisation. One polyamide was developed  
for use in puncture-resistant bicycle tyres.  The two monomers for it are:
H2NN H2O
ClO
ClCC
 The hexagon with the circle in the middle stands for a ring of 6 carbon atoms, with 3 double bonds. 
 a
 What is 
condensation polymerisation?
 b
 Show in detail how the monomers join.
 
c
 Name the other product of the reaction. 
 d
 
i
  In what way is this polymer similar to nylon? (See page 
266.)
  ii
  But its properties are dif
ferent from those of 
nylon. Why? 
 A similar polymer has been developed as a fabric for fireproof clothing. Its structure is:
nCC N
HNHOO
 e  Draw the structures of the two monomers that 
could be used to make this polymer
.
5 Many synthetic polymers contain the amide linkage.
 a
 Draw the structure of the amide 
linkage.
 b
  Which important natural macromolecules also contain the amide linkage?
 The substances in 
b will undergo hydrolysis in the 
laboratory, in the presence of acid.
 c
 
i
 What does 
hydrolysis mean?
 
  ii
 What are the products of the hydrolysis?
  
iii
 How can the products be separated?
6
 One very strong polymer has this structure: 
    CO
CO CH2CH2OO
 a Which type of polymerisation produced it?
 b
 Which type of linkage joins the monomers?
 c
  Draw the structures of the two monomers from which this polymer could be made.
 d
  Compare the structure above with that for T
erylene (page 267). What may be responsible 
for the greater strength of this polymer? 
 e
 i
  Which 
natural macromolecules have the 
same linkage as this polymer?
  
ii
  Hydrolysis of these macromolecules, using an alkali, gives a useful product. Name it.7
 Starch is a carbohydrate. It is a natural polymer
. 
This shows part of a starch macromolecule: 
 O O O
 a What is a macromolecule?
 b
 What is a 
carbohydrate?
 c
 Which type of polymerisation gives starch?
 d
 What do the blocks represent, above?
 e
 i
  Draw a diagram showing the structure of the monomer for starch. (Use a block.)
  
ii
 Name this monomer
.
 f
 Starch is also called a 
polysaccharide. Why?
 g
 Starch can be broken down by hydrolysis.
  
i
  Describe two ways in which the hydrolysis is carried out. (One occurs in your body
.)
  
ii
  One takes place at a far lower temperature than the other
. What makes this possible?
8
 In the lab, 
partial hydrolysis of starch gives a 
mixture of colourless products. They can be identified using chromatography. A locating agent is needed. 
 a
  Draw diagrams showing at least two of the products.
 (Use blocks like those in question 7.)
 b
 What is a 
locating agent and why is it needed? 
 c
  Outline the steps in carrying out the chromatography
. (Page 25 may help.)
9
 Soaps are salts of fatty acids. 
 a
 Name one fatty acid.
 b
  In which way is a fatty acid dif
ferent from  
ethanoic acid? In which way is it similar?
 c
  Below is one example of a compound found in vegetable oil, and used to make soap.
  
H2C – OOC(C17H35)
  HC – OOC(C15H31)
  
H2C – OOC(C14H29)
  i This compound is an ester. Explain that term.
  
ii
  T
o make soap, the oil is usually reacted with 
a sodium compound. Which one?
  
iii
 Which type of reaction takes place?
 d
 
i
  The reaction in c will give 
four different 
products. Write down their formulae.
  
ii
 Which ones can be used as soap?
  
iii
 One product is an alcohol. Name it.
  
iv
  In which way is this product similar to ethanol?
 
In which way is it different?
 e
 Name three vegetable oils used to make soap.Polymers
279

--- Page 281 ---
!
19.1
 Step into the lab, and try  
the scientific method ….The lab: the home of chemistry
All the information in this book has one thing in common. It is all based 
on real experiments, carried out in labs around the world, over the years – and even over the centuries. The lab is the home of chemistry!
How do chemists work?
Like all scientists, chemists follow the scientific method. This flowchart  shows the steps. The handwritten notes are from a student.
1 Y ou observe something that makes you ask yourself a question.
 K
itchen cleaner X is better at removing grease than kitchen cleaner Y. 
 
Why?
2  Come up with a hypothesis – a reasonable statement that you can test.
  Y
ou might need to do some research in books or on the internet, to 
help you.
 S
odium hydroxide is used in kitchen cleaners to help remove grease. 
 T
he labels on X and Y say they contain sodium hydroxide.
 My hyp
othesis: X may contain more sodium hydroxide than Y does. 
3  Plan an experiment to test the hypothesis.
 I plan t
o do a titration to test my hypothesis. See the details in the next unit.
4  Carry out the experiment, and record the results.
 S
ee the results in the next unit.
5  Analyse the results.
 Y
ou can help me do this, in the next unit.
6  Did the results support your hypothesis?
 S
ee the next unit.
7 Share your conclusions with other people.
 T
he teacher wants to see them!
Planning an experiment: the variables
Suppose you want to investigate how the rate of a reaction changes with temperature. 
  The temperature is under your control. So it is called the independent 
variable. It is the only thing you change as you do the experiment.  
  If the rate changes as you change the temperature, the rate is a 
dependent variable. It depends on the temperature.
In many experiments you do, there will be an independent variable.  You control it – and keep everything else unchanged.        
That golden rule …
When you investigate something in 
the lab, change only one thing at a time, and see what effect it has.in the lab
280
Chemistry: a practical subject

--- Page 282 ---
Thinking  Use your brain before, 
during, and after the experiment. 
That is what brains are for.  (They really like being used.)
Working accurately
 Sloppy work 
will ruin an experiment. Follow 
the instructions
. Measure things 
carefully. Think about safety too.
The experiments you do
Often, you will not get a chance to plan an experiment for yourself. Instead, the teacher will tell you what to do. So you might miss out steps 1 –3 in the 
flowchart on page 280.
But even if you pick up at step 4 , you are still using the scientific method, and 
gaining practice in it. And you are following in the footsteps of many famous 
scientists, who have changed our lives by their careful work in the lab.
One day, you may become a scientist yourself. Even a famous one!
Observing  This is a very 
important skill. Chemists have 
made some amazing discoveries just by watching very carefully
. 
Doing some maths
 Y
ou often 
have to do some calculations using your results. And drawing a graph can help you see what is going on. 
Using apparatus and techniques   
Weigh things, measure out volumes of liquids, measure temperature, do titrations, prepare crystals ….
Writing up
 You may have to write 
a report on your experiment, and 
give conclusions. And say how the experiment could be improved?The skills you use
When you plan and carry out an experiment, you use many different skills:
Q
1 Do you think this counts as a hypothesis?
 a
 I am late for class again.
 b
 If I add mor
e yeast, the fermentation may go faster.
 c
 December follows November
. 
 d
  The rate of photosynthesis may change with 
 
temperature.2 Explain in your own wor ds what an independent variable is.
3 Which would be the independent variable, in an experiment 
to test the statement in 
1b?
4 Do you think the scientific method would be useful to:
 a
 a doctor?
   
b
 a detective?
 Explain your answer
.
281in the lab

--- Page 283 ---
19.2
Comparing those kitchen cleaners
In step 2 of the scientific method in the last unit, a student put forward  
a hypothesis. Here you can read how the student tested the hypothesis. But the report is not quite finished. That is your task.
  The colour of the solution has 
changed: the titration is complete.
An experiment to compare the amount of sodium hydroxide in two kitchen cleaners
Introduction
I noticed that kitchen cleaner X is better at removing grease than kitchen 
cleaner Y is. T he labels show that both kitchen cleaners contain sodium hydroxide. T his chemical is used in many cleaners because it reacts with grease to form soluble sodium salts, which go into solution in the washing-up water . 
My hypothesis
Kitchen cleaner X may contain more sodium hydroxide than kitchen cleaner 
Y does.
Planning my experiment 
I plan to titrate a sample of each cleaner against dilute hydrochloric acid, 
using methyl orange as indicator . T his is a suitable method because the sodium hydroxide in the cleaner will neutralise the acid. T he indicator will change colour when neutralisation is complete. 
To make sure it is a fair test, I will use exactly the same volume of cleaner , and 
the same concentration of acid, and the same number of drops of indicator each time, and swirl the flask in the same way. T he only thing I will change is the type of cleaner . 
I will wear safety goggles, since sodium hydroxide and hydrochloric acid are 
corrosive. 
T he experiment
25 cm
3 of cleaner X were measured into a conical flask, using a pipette.  
5 drops of methyl orange
 were adde
d, and the solution turned yellow.
A burette was filled to the upper mark with hydrochloric acid of concentration  
1 mol
 /
 dm3. T he initial level of the acid was noted.
T he acid was allowed to run into the conical flask. T he flask was continually and carefully swirled. As the acid dripped in, the solution showed flashes of pink. When the end point was near the acid was added drop by drop. When the solution changed from yellow to pink, the titration was stopped. T he final level of the acid was recorded.
T he experiment was repeated with cleaner Y .in the lab
282
Example of an experiment

--- Page 284 ---
In the question section below, you will have the chance to complete  
the student’s analysis and conclusions, and come up with suggestions  for ensuring that the results were reliable.
Q
1 In this experiment, was ther e:
 a
 an independent variable? If so, what was it?
 b
 a dependent variable? If so, what was it?
2 a  Look at the apparatus below .  
Which pieces did the student use in the experiment?  
Give their letters and names.
 b
  When measuring out solutions for titration, a pipette is used instead of a measuring cylinder
. Why is this? 
 c
  Why is a conical flask used rather than a beaker
, for  
the titration?
 d
 Why ar
e burettes used for titrations?
 e
 Which is 
more accurate for measuring liquids?
  
i
 a bur
ette
     
ii
 a pipette 
 
 Explain clearly why you think so.3 Why is an indicator needed, for titrations?
4 a  Suggest another indicator the student could have used, in 
place of methyl orange. (Hint: page 149.)
 b
  What colour change would be observed at the end-point, for the indicator you suggested?
5 Now complete the student’ s Analysis of the results. 
6  Complete the Conclusion, by saying whether or not the 
results supported the hypothesis. 
7 How would you impr ove the reliability of the results?
8 How would you modify the experiment, to compar e liquid 
scale-removers for kettles?
 
(They contain acid.)
9 Next week the student will do an experiment to see  
whether neutralisation is exothermic or endothermic. Which item below will the student definitely use?
50100
–20–100102030405060ºCCD EF B A One is better at r emoving grease. 
Might it have a higher concentration of 
sodium hydroxide?
T he results
For X:
  F
o r  Y:
Initial level of acid in the burette
 0.0 cm3 I nitial level of acid in the burette  22.2 cm3
Final level  22.2 cm3 Fin al level  37 .5 cm3
Volume of acid used  22.2 cm3 V olume of acid used  15.3 cm3
Analysis of the results
T he same volume of each cleaner was used. T he sodium hydroxide in X neutralised 22.2 
cm3 of acid. T he sodium hydroxide in Y neutralised 15.3 cm3 of acid. T his means that 
solution …
My conclusion
T hese results … 
To improve the reliability of the results
I would …
283in the lab

--- Page 285 ---
19.3
!Using a measuring cylinder
•	 You	can	use	a	gas	jar	to	collect	a	
gas over water
.
•	 But
	
if
	
you
	
want
	
to
	
measure
	
the
	
volume of the gas, r
oughly, use a 
measuring cylinder instead.
•	 If
	
you
	
want
	
to
	
measure
	
its
	
volume	
accurately
, use a gas syringe. in the lab
284
Working with gases in the lab
Preparing gases in the lab
You might have to prepare a gas in the lab, one day. The usual way to make 
a gas is to displace it from a solid or solution, using apparatus like this. The table below gives some examples. 
But to make ammonia, you can heat any ammonium compound with  
a base such as sodium hydroxide or calcium hydroxide – using both reactants in solid form. 
Collecting the gases you have prepared
The table below shows four ways of collecting a gas you have prepared. The method depends on whether the gas is heavier or lighter than air, whether you need it dry, and what you want to do with it.gas
solid soliddropping funnel
for adding
concentrated acidgasthistle funnel
for adding
dliute acid
To make … Place in flask …. Add …. Reaction
carbon dioxide calcium carbonate 
(marble chips)dilute hydrochloric acid CaCO3 (s) 1 2HCl (aq)  CaCl2 (aq) 1 H2O (l) 1 CO2 (g)
hydrogen pieces of zinc dilute hydrochloric acid Zn (s) 1 2HCl (aq)  ZnCl2 (aq) 1 H2 (g)
oxygen manganese(IV) oxide 
(as a catalyst)hydrogen peroxide    2H2O2 (aq)  2H2O (l) 1 O2 (g)
Method upward displacement  of airdownward displacement  of airover water gas syringe
Use when … the gas is heavier than air the gas is lighter than air the gas is sparingly 
soluble in wateryou want to measure  the volume accurately 
Apparatus
gas jar gas jargas jar
watergas syringegas jar gas jargas jar
watergas syringegas jar gas jargas jar
watergas syringegas jar gas jargas jar
watergas syringe
Examples carbon dioxide, CO2  
sulfur dioxide, SO2 
hydrogen chloride, HClammonia, NH3  
hydrogen, H2carbon dioxide, CO2 
hydrogen, H2  
oxygen, O2any gas

--- Page 286 ---
Q
1 a  Sketch the complete apparatus you will use to prepare 
and collect carbon dioxide. Label all the parts.
 b
  How will you then test the gas to confirm that it is carbon 
dioxide? 
 c
 W
rite the equation for a positive test reaction.
2 a  Hydr ogen cannot be collected by upward displacement of 
air. Why not?
 b
  Hydr
ogen burns with a squeaky pop. Write a balanced 
equation for the reaction that takes place. 3 a Name two substances you could use to make ammonia. 
 b
 Ammonia cannot be collected over water
. Why not?
 c
 The test for ammonia is …… ?
4 It is not a good idea to r ely on smell, to identify a gas. 
Suggest at least two reasons why.
5 T o measure the rate of the reaction between magnesium 
and hydrochloric acid, you will collect the hydrogen that forms. Which is better to use for this: a measuring cylinder over water, or a gas syringe? Give more than one reason. 
285in the lab
Tests for gases
You have a sample of gas. You think you know what it is, but you’re not 
sure. So you need to do a test. Below are some tests for common gases. Each is based on particular properties of the gas, including its appearance, and sometimes its smell.
Gas Description and test details
Ammonia, NH3
Properties
TestResultAmmonia is a colourless alkaline gas with a strong sharp smell.Hold damp indicator paper in it.The indicator paper turns blue.
	
(You
	
may
	
also
	
notice
	
the
	
sharp
	
smell.)
Carbon dioxide, CO2
Properties
 
Test
Result Carbon dioxide is a colourless, weakly acidic gas. It reacts with limewater (a solution of calcium 
hydroxide in water) to give a white precipitate of calcium carbonate:
CO
2 (g) 1 Ca(OH)2 (aq)  CaCO3 (s) 1 H2O (l)
Bubble
	
the
	
gas
	
through
	
limewater.
	
Limewater 
turns cloudy or milky.
Chlorine, Cl2
PropertiesTestResultChlorine is a green poisonous gas which bleaches dyes.Hold damp indicator paper in the gas, in a fume cupboard.Indicator paper turns white.
Hydrogen, H
2
PropertiesTestResultHydrogen is a colourless gas which combines violently with oxygen when lit.Collect the gas in a tube and hold a lighted splint to it.The gas burns with a squeaky pop.
Oxygen, O
2
PropertiesTestResult Oxygen is a colourless gas. Fuels burn much more readily in it than in air.Collect the gas in a test-tube and hold a glowing splint to it.The splint immediately bursts into flame.

--- Page 287 ---
19.4 Testing for ions in the labin the lab
286
Time for detective work!
You have an unknown salt, and you want to find out what it is.  
This unit gives some tests you can do. But first, note these points:
  Positive ions are also called cations. Negative ions are called anions.
  In each test, either a precipitate forms or a gas you can test.
Tests for cations 
This table shows tests for the ammonium ion, and several metal ions. 
 T o test for the ammonium ion you can use the unknown salt as a solid,  
 or in aqueous solution. But for metal ions, use their aqueous solutions.
 T o test for metal cations, you can use dilute sodium hydroxide or   
 ammonia solution, since both provide hydroxide ions. But the results
 
 are not always the same, as you will see below
.
!Remember CAP!
Cations Are Positive. 
They would go to the cathode (2).
!Complex ions
 In complex ions, a metal ion is surr
ounded by several negative 
ions, or molecules. 
 Many transition elements form complex ions. 
 
 The copper ion Cu(NH3)421 is  
an example. (See below.)
Cation Test If the cation is present Ionic equation for the reaction
ammonium 
NH41Add a little dilute sodium hydroxide solution.  Heat gently.Ammonia gas is given off.  (It turns litmus red.)NH
41 (aq) 1 OH  2 (aq)  NH3 (g) 1  H2O (l )
copper(II)Cu
21Add dilute sodium hydroxide or ammonia solution. A pale blue precipitate forms. 
But
	
it
	
dissolves
	
on
	
adding
	
more
	
 
ammonia, giving a deep blue  
solution.Cu  21 (aq) 1 2OH  2 (aq)  Cu(OH)2 (s)
The precipitate dissolves again in ammonia  solution because a soluble complex ion forms: [Cu(NH
3)4]2+ (aq). 
iron(II)Fe
21Add dilute sodium hydroxide or ammonia solution. A pale green precipitate forms. Fe
  21 (aq) 1  2OH  2 (aq)  Fe(OH)2 (s)
iron(III)Fe
31Add dilute sodium hydroxide or ammonia solution.A red-brown precipitate forms. Fe
  3+ (aq) 1  3OH  2 (aq)  Fe(OH)3 (s) 
aluminiumAl
31Add dilute sodium hydroxide or ammonia solution. A white precipitate forms.  It dissolves again on adding  excess sodium hydroxide, giving  a colourless solution.But
	
it
	
will not dissolve if more  
ammonia is added instead.Al31 (aq) 1  3OH  2 (aq)  Al(OH)3 (s)
The precipitate dissolves in excess sodium  hydroxide because aluminium hydroxide is  amphoteric. The soluble aluminate ion forms: (Al(OH)
42).
zincZn
21Add dilute sodium hydroxide or ammonia solution.A white precipitate forms. 
It dissolves again on adding more 
sodium hydroxide or ammonia, giving a colourless solution.Zn
21 (aq) 1  2OH  2 (aq)  Zn(OH)2 (s)
The precipitate dissolves again in sodium  hydroxide because zinc hydroxide is amphoteric.  
The soluble zincate ion forms: (Zn(OH)
42–
 ) 
It dissolves again in ammonia solution because  
a soluble complex ion forms: [Zn(NH3)4] 21 (aq).  
calciumCa
21Add dilute sodium hydroxide solution.A white precipitate forms.  It will not dissolve on adding excess sodium hydroxide.Ca
21 (aq) 1  2OH  2 (aq)  Ca(OH)2 (s)
Add dilute ammonia solution. No precipitate, or very slight  
white precipitate.

--- Page 288 ---
Q
1 The other name for a positive ion is … ?
2 Which two cations on page 286 cannot be identified using 
only sodium hydr
oxide? Which further test could be done?
3 Sodium hydr oxide and ammonia solutions cannot be used to 
identify Na+ or K+ ions. Why not?   4 Silver nitrate is used in the test for halides. Why?
5 Nitrates ar e not tested by forming a precipitate. Why not?
6 Where do the OH– ions come from, in the test for nitrate ions? 
7 a Why is acid used, in testing for carbonates? 
 b
 Limewater is also used in the test. What is limewater?
287in the lab
Tests for anions
Halide ions (Cl  2, Br 2, I 2)
  T o a small amount of the solution, add an equal volume of dilute  
nitric acid. Then add silver nitrate solution. 
  Silver halides are insoluble. So if halide ions are present a precipitate 
will form. The colour tells you which one. Look at this table:
Precipitate Indicates presence of … Ionic equation for the reaction
white chloride ions, Cl
 2Ag 1 (aq) 1 Cl  2 (aq)  AgCl ( s) 
cream bromide
	
ions,
	
Br
 2Ag 1 (aq) 1  Br 2 (aq) 	AgBr	(s)
yellow iodide ions, I
 2Ag 1 (aq) 1 I  2 (aq)  AgI ( s) 
Sulfate ions (SO422)
  T o a small amount of the solution add an equal volume of dilute 
hydrochloric acid. Then add barium nitrate solution.
  Barium sulfate is insoluble. So if sulfate ions are present a white 
precipitate will form. The ionic equation for the reaction is:
 Ba21(aq) 1 SO422 (aq)   BaSO4 (s)
Nitrate ions (NO32)
  T o a small amount of the unknown solid or solution, add a little 
sodium hydroxide solution. Then add some small pieces of aluminium foil, and heat gently.
  If ammonia gas is given of f, the unknown substance contained nitrate 
ions. The ionic equation for the reaction is:
 8Al (
s) 1 3NO32 (aq) 1 5OH  2 (aq) 1 2H2O (l)  3NH3 (g) 1 8AlO22 (aq)
Carbonate ions (CO322)
  T o a small amount of the unknown solid or solution, add a little  
dilute hydrochloric acid.
  If the mixture bubbles and gives of f a gas that turns limewater milky, 
the unknown substance contained carbonate ions. The gas is carbon dioxide. The ionic equation for the reaction is:
 2H
 1 (aq)  1    CO322 (aq)    CO2 (g)  1 H2O (l) 
   Halides ar e present. From left to 
right: chloride, bromide, iodide.
 Y ou	need 	 only 	 a 	 small 	 amount 	 of 	  
the unknown substance, in testing for 
cations and anions.
u The carbonate test: that is limewater 
on the right, and it is tur
ning milky.

--- Page 289 ---
Checkup on Chapter 19
Questions
For all students
1  A sample of soil from a vegetable garden was 
thoroughly crushed, and water added as shown:
 
 a  Using a conical flask, filter funnel, filter paper , 
universal indicator, and dropping pipette, show how you would measure the pH of the soil.
 b
  How would you check that the results for this sample were valid for the whole garden?
2
 This apparatus is used to collect gases in the lab.
 a
  Make a drawing of the apparatus, labelling the
 
water, trough, measuring cylinder, delivery tube, flask, and dropping funnel. 
  
 b  This apparatus can be used for preparing the gases hydrogen and carbon dioxide, but 
not 
sulfur dioxide. Explain why.
3 This apparatus is used to measure rate of a reaction.
  hydrochloric acidYgas syringe10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80
 a Suggest a suitable reagent to use as Y .
 b
 Which other piece of apparatus is needed?
 c
 Outline the procedure for this experiment.
 d
  Y
ou must be careful not to use too much of the 
reagents. Why?Revision checklist
For all students
Make sure you can …
 identify these common pieces of laboratory apparatus, and say what they are used for:
 
beaker
 test-tube
 conical flask   
 pipette
 burette
 measuring cylinder
 gas jar
 gas syringe
 condenser
 thermometer
 filter funnel
 water trough
 arrange these pieces of apparatus in order of accuracy  
(as here) for measuring out a volume of liquid:
 beaker
   
measuring cylinder
   
burette
   
pipette
 describe how to carry out these procedures:
 
–
 filtration
  
 
–
 simple distillation
 
–
 fractional distillation
 
–
 crystallisation
 
–
 paper chromatography    
 
–
 titration
 describe the scientific method
 explain what these are:
 independent variable
     
dependent variable
 explain why measurements are often repeated,  in 
experimental work
  describe how to prepare these gases in the lab:   
hydrogen     oxygen      carbon dioxide     ammonia
 
–
 and name suitable reactants to use
 –
 give the equations for the reactions
 –
 draw the apparatus
 give the test for these gases:   
hydrogen
      
oxygen
      
carbon dioxide
  
ammonia
     
chlorine
 give another term for:      cation     anion
 explain that in the tests for anions and cations, either a precipitate is formed, or a gas is given of
f
 describe tests to identify these cations:
 
Cu
 21  Fe 21  Fe 31  Al 31  Zn 21  Ca 21  NH41
 describe tests to identify these anions:
 halide ions (Cl
 2, Br 2, I 2)    sulfate ion, SO4 22
 nitrate ion, NO3 2                  carbonate ion, CO3 22
Make sure you can also …
 describe a test for water (page 124)
 explain that melting and boiling points can be   
used to test whether a substance is pure (page 19)soil  
samplewaterin the lab
288


--- Page 290 ---
4 A sample of a potassium salt was contaminated 
with potassium chloride. These tests were carried out on the contaminated sample.
 TEST A
 Dilute nitric acid is added to the solid. The mixture bubbles. The gas given of
f turns limewater milky.
 a
 i
 Name the gas given of
f.
  
ii
 Which anion is present in the potassium salt?
 TEST B
 An equal volume of barium nitrate solution is added
 
to a solution of the solid. A precipitate forms.
 b
 i
 What colour will the precipitate be?
  
ii
 Name 
the precipitate, and explain why it forms.
  
iii
  The precipitate will disappear if dilute nitric acid is added. Why?
 TEST C
 An equal volume of silver nitrate solution is added to a solution of the solid. A precipitate forms.
 c
 i
 What colour will this precipitate be?
  ii
  This precipitate confirms the presence of 
 
the impurity. Explain why.
 d
  Give the formulae for both the potassium salt and 
the impurity.
5
 T
wo solutions W and X are tested with universal 
indicator paper. 
 Solution W
:
 the indicator paper turns red 
 Solution Y
:
 the indicator paper turns orange
 a
 i
  Which solution could have a pH of 1, and which
 could have a pH of 5?
  
ii
 Which type of solution is Y?
 Further tests are carried out in test-tubes.
 TEST A
 A piece of magnesium is added to solution W
.
 b
 i
 What will you observe in the test-tube? 
  ii
 What is formed as a result of the reaction
  iii
 How will solution Y compare, in this reaction?
 TEST B
 A solid, which is a sodium compound, is added to
 
solution W. A gas is given off. It turns limewater milky.
 c
 i
 What colour will the solid be?
  
ii
 Name the gas released.
  
iii
 Suggest a name for the solid.
 TEST C
 A few drops of barium nitrate solution are added to a solution of W
. A white precipitate forms.
 d
 i
 Name the white precipitate.
  ii
 Identify solution W
.6  Ammonium nitrate (NH4NO3) is an important 
fertiliser. The ions in it can be identified by tests.
 a
 Name the cation present, and give its formula.
 b
 Which of these tests will confirm its presence?
  
A
  When aqueous sodium hydroxide is added
 to 
a solution of the compound, a white precipitate forms. This does not dissolve in excess sodium hydroxide. 
  
B
  On heating the solid with solid sodium
 
hydroxide, a gas is given off. It turns damp red litmus paper blue.
  
C
  On heating the solid with dilute hydrochloric
 
acid, a gas is given off. It turns damp blue litmus paper red.
 c
 Name the anion present, and give its formula.
 d
  Which of these tests will confirm its presence?
 
  
A
  When dilute hydrochloric acid is added the solid fizzes, and releases a gas which relights a glowing splint. 
  
B
  When a solution of barium ions is added to a  
solution of the compound, a white precipitate  
forms.
  
C
  When sodium hydroxide solution and aluminium foil are added to the solid, ammonia is given of
f after gentle heating.
7
 A sample of mineral water contained these ions: 
 Name of ion Concentration  
(milligrams
 /
 dm3)
calcium 55
chloride 37
hydrogen carbonate 248
magnesium 19
nitrate 0.05
potassium 1
sodium 24
sulfate 13
 a  Make two lists, one for the anions and the other 
for the cations present in this mineral water.
 b
 i
  Which metal ion is present in the highest concentration?
  
ii
  What mass of that metal would be present in a small bottle of water, volume 50 cm
3?
 c
  Which of the ions will react with barium nitrate
 
solution to give a white precipitate?
 d
  Of the metal ions, only calcium can be identified
 
by a precipitation test. Why is this?
 e
  A sample of the water is heated with sodium hydroxide and aluminium foil. Ammonia gas could not be identified, even though the nitrate ion is present. Suggest a reason. in the lab
289

--- Page 291 ---
page 33  6  C  6p 6e 6n;  O 8p 8e 8n;  Mg 12p 12e 12n;   
Al
 13p 13e 14n;
 
Cu 29p 29e 35n
page 44
 3 b i 
60
 ii 
34
 iii
 0
 iv
 10
 v
 146
page 45
 9 a i 
38
 ii
 40
 
page 71
 2
 127
 4
 32
 b
 254
 c
 16
 
d 71
 
e 58
 f
 46
 – all relative 
  
molecular mass
 g 
132, relative formula mass
page 73
 1 a
 95 g
 
b 35.5 g
 
c 47.5 g
 2
 75% carbon
 25% hydrogen
  
3 a 
90%  b 1.5 g
page 75
 10 a 
18
 b
 17
 
c 46
 
d 80
 e 
98
 
f 36.5
 g
 142  
11 a 40 b 239
 c
 78
 d
 58.5
 
e 170
 f
 132
 g
 138
 h 
278
  
12 a 
27.2 g
 
ii 2.72 g
 b
 50 g
 
c 80%
  
13 a
 17.5%
 b i
 2185 kg  ii 375 kg
 
c 91.7%
page 77
 4 a
 1 g
 b
 127 g
 
c 35.5 g
 d 
71 g
 5 a
 32 g
 b
 64 g
 6 
138 g   
7 a 9 moles
 b
 3 moles
 8 a 
6.02 3 1023  b 35.5 g
page 79
 1 b 
2
 c i
 32 g
 
ii 8 g
 2 b
 CuCO3, 124 g; CuO, 80 g;  
CO2, 44 g;  c i  11 g  ii  20 g
page 81
 3
 24 dm3 4 a 168 dm3 b 12 dm3 c 0.024 dm3 (24 cm3) 
5 a 12 dm3 b 2.4 dm3 6 a 12 dm3 b 12 dm3 7 a 12 dm3 b 6 dm3
page 83  1 a 1 mole  b 1 mole  2 a 2 mol/dm3 b 1.5 mol/dm3  
3 a
 0.5 dm3 (500 cm3) b 0.005 dm3 (5 cm3) 4 a 20 g  b 0.5 g   
5 a
 0.5 moles per litre
 b
 0.25 moles per litre
page 85
 1 a
 4 b 4 g
 3 
FeS
 4
 SO3
page 87  4 CH  5 C2H4 6 a C7H16 b C7H16 7 P4O6
page 89  2  76.7%  3  63%  4  172 g  5 88%
page 90
 1 b
 160 g
 c
 2000 moles
 
d 2 moles
 
e 4000 moles
 f
 224 kg  
2b
 0.5 moles  
c i 11.2 g
 ii 8.8 g
 iii 4.8 dm3 or 4800 cm3 3 a i 4 moles  
ii 19 moles
 b 
4.75 moles
 
c 114 dm3 d 227 g  e 502.2 dm3
page 91  4 a  0.5 moles  b  25 cm3 c 75 cm3 d 50 cm3  
5 a
 1.4 g
 b
 0.025 moles
 c
 0.025 moles
 d
 Fe21 e 0.6 dm3   
6 a 106.5 g
 b
 3 moles
 c
 1mole
 d
 AlCl3 e 0.1 mol/dm3   
7 a 45.5 cm3 b 41.7 cm3 c 62.5 cm3  
8 a
 P2O3 b 41.3 g  c  P4O10 d P4O6 (or P2O3)  
9 a
 Zn3P2 b 24.1%  10 a  64 g  b  4 moles  c 2 moles  d MnO  2 
e 632.2g  11 a  N2H4  b C2N2 c N2O4 d C6H12O6 12 b CH2 c A is 
C3H6 B is C6H12 13 a 217 g  b 20.1 g of mercury, 1.6 g of oxygen   
c
 94.5 %
 14 a
 0.0521 moles
 b
 4.375 g
 c
 
87.5% 
page 117
 4 
2486 kJ/mol
 
page 128
 2 b 
drop of 4
 °C for ammonium nitrate, rise of 20  °C for 
calcium chloride, d i  17  °C for NH4NO3, 65 °C for CaCl2, ii 23  °C for 
NH4NO3, 35 °C for CaCl2, iii 21  °C for NH4NO3, 45 °C for CaCl2 
page 129  4 d 55.6 kJ  6 c i 2220 kJ/mol  ii 2801 kJ/mol   
d –581 kJ/mol
page 133
 3 a i
 29 cm3 ii 39 cm3 b 1.5 minutes  c i 5 cm3 of 
hydrogen per minute ii 0 cm3 of hydrogen per minute 
page 135
 1 a i
 60 cm3 ii 60 cm3
page 137  1 a  experiment 1, 0.55 g; experiment 2, 0.95 g 
b experiment 1, 0.33 g per minute; experiment 2, 0.5 g per minute
page 146
 2 c i 
14 cm3 of hydrogen  /minute  ii 9 cm3 of hydrogen  /
minute
 iii 
8 cm3 of hydrogen  / minute  e 40 cm3 f 5 minutes   
g 
8 cm3 of hydrogen  / minute
page 147
 5 i 
0.5 g
page 163
 2
 50 cm3 3 1.6 mol/dm3
page 165  8 c 0.014 moles  d 0.007 moles  e 0.742g  e 1.258g    
f 0.07 moles  g 10 molespage 180
 2b
 Accept rough values around melting point 40 °C, 
boiling point 725 °C
 c
 i
 5
 ii
 37 iii 1
page 193
 8
 c i 2.45 volts
 ii
 0.65 volts
page 209
 3 c i 
990 kg
 ii
 0.25%
page 222
 3 d 
20.8%
page 223
 4 a i
 
36%
 
ii It is greater.
 b
 78%
page 227
 3 c
 28%
page 229
 4 a
 21.2%
page 289
 7 b
 ii 2.75 milligrams
Questions from past exam paperspage 296
 13 c
 80
page 298
 2 b i
 7.7% ii 1:1
 iii
 empirical formula is CH,  
molecular formula is C6H6
page 299  5 a i
copper iron sulfur
composition by mass/g (4.80) (4.20) 4.80
number of moles of atoms 0.075 0.075 0.15
simplest mole ratio of atoms 1 1 2
ii
 
CuFeS2
page 299  7 b i  100  ii  56  iii  12.5 kg
page 301
  
13 a energy to break bonds 5 436 1 158 5 1594 kJ 
energy released in forming bonds 5 2 3 562 5 21124 kJ 
energy in - energy out 5 2530 kJ, so the reaction is exothermicpage 302
 15 d
 i
 0.033 moles
 ii
 0.033 moles
 iii
 5.67 g
 iv
 70.6%
page 305
 3 a 
exptinitial temperature /
 °Cfinal temperature /
 °Cdifference / °C
1 24 27 13
2 26 22 24
3 21 11 210
4 29 23 26
3 e i
 – 
8
 
°C
 ii
 – 3
 °C
page 305
 4 a
time/svolume of oxygen/cm3
catalyst W catalyst X
0 0 0
20 16 29
40 32 34
60 36 36
80 37 37
100 37 37
page 306
 5 b
 47
 6
 1 g
 /
 100 g of water
page 307
 9 b 
and c 
Burette readings  / cm3
Experiment 1 Experiment 2
final reading 26.0 29.0
initial reading 0.0 16.0
difference 26.0 13.0
290Answers to the numerical questions in this book

--- Page 292 ---
The exam papers   
For your Cambridge IGCSE  Chemistry exam, you must take three papers out  
of six. Look at this list.
Everyone must take this:
Paper 1, multiple choice questions (45 minutes, 30
 % of the total marks)
Then 
one from these two:
Paper 2, for the Core syllabus (1 hour 15 minutes, 50
 % of the total marks)
 
Paper 3, for the Extended syllabus (1 hour 15 minutes, 50
 % of the total marks)
And 
one from these three: 
Paper 4
 Coursework (20
 % of total marks)
Paper 5
 Practical test (1 hour 15 minutes, 20
 % of the total marks)
Paper 6
 Alternative to Practical written paper (1 hour
, 20
 % of the total marks)
Notice that Paper 1 carries 30
 % of the total marks for the exam. 
Your choice  
of Papers 2 or 3 carries 50
 %. Y
our remaining paper carries 20
 %. 
Getting ready for the exam   
  First, do you know which papers you will take? If you are not sure, ask  
your teacher.
  For Paper 3 (Extended) you will need to revise everything in this book,  
except the extra material on the yellow pages.
  For Paper 2 (Core), you can ignore all the material with a red line beside it,   
and the extra material.
  The CD with this book has lots of material to help you revise,  including  
tests, revision advice, and sample exam papers with real questions from past papers. Check it out! 
Doing past exam questions   
Doing questions is a great way to revise. And before your exam, it is really important to work through questions from past papers.
The next eighteen pages of this book have real questions from past exams, for 
Papers 2, 3 and 6.
 If you are taking Paper 2 in the exam, you can ignore the Paper 3 questions.
  If you are taking Paper 3, you should concentrate on the Paper 3 questions – 
but you may also find the Paper 2 questions helpful.
  The Paper 6 questions are for everyone. Even if you are not taking Paper 6 
in the exam, you will find that these questions help with the other papers.  
Note that answers for all the 
numerical questions in this book, including exam 
questions, are on page 290. Your teacher can provide answers for all the other questions, from both the book and CD, so that you can check your progress.
Good luck with your revision!
291About the Cambridge IGCSE  Chem istry exam 

--- Page 293 ---
1 a  The table gives some information about five  
elements, A, B, C, D and E. 
Copy and complete the table by writing either metal or non-metal in the last column.
element properties metal or  
non-metal
A shiny solid which 
conducts electricity
B reddish brown liquid 
with a low boiling point
C a form of carbon which 
is black in colour and conducts electricity
D white solid which is an 
insulator and has a high melting point
E dull yellow solid which does not conduct heat
 [5]
 b
  Describe how metallic character changes 
 
across a Period.
 [1]
 c
 Sodium is in Group I of the Periodic T
able.
  
i
  Draw a diagram to show the full electronic
 
structure of sodium.
 [1]
  
ii
  Complete the equation to show what happens  
when a sodium atom forms a sodium ion.
   
Na
   Na1 1 .........  [1]
 d
  Complete these sentences 
about properties of 
the Group I elements using words from the list.
  acidic
 basic
 decrease
 hard
  increase
 lithium
 potassium
 soft
   The Group I elements are relatively ......... metals
 
which ........in reactivity going down the Group. 
Sodium reacts more violently with water than .......... The Group I metals all form ......... oxides. 
 [
4]
 Cambridge IGCSE Chemistry 0620 Paper 2 Q1 November 2008
2 Lavandulol is found in  
lavender plants.  The formula of lavandulol  is shown on the right.
 
 a
  Which is the alcohol 
functional group in this formula?
                               
 [1]C
CHCH3 CH3
CH2
CH3CH2CH2
CCH HO b  Is lavandulol a saturated or unsaturated  
compound? Give a reason for your answer.
 
[1]
 c
  State the names of the two products formed 
when
 lavandulol is burnt in excess oxygen.
 
[2]
 d
  Lavandulol can be extracted from lavender
 
flowers by distillation using the apparatus shown below. The lavandulol is carried off  in small droplets with the steam.
A
lavandulol
waterlavender
ﬂowers
and waterX
heat
  i  State the name of the piece of apparatus  
labelled A.
 
[1]
  
ii
  What is the temperature of the water at 
 
point X in the diagram?
 
[1]
  
iii
  The lavandulol and water are collected in the  
beaker
. What information in the diagram shows  
that lavandulol is less dense than water?
 [1]
 e
  Lavender flowers contain a variety of dif
ferent 
pigments (colourings). A student separated 
these pigments using paper chromatography.
  
The results are shown in the diagram below.
chromatography paper
  i  Copy the diagram and put an X to show where 
 the mixture of pigments was placed  
at the start of the experiment.
 
[1]
  
ii
  How many pigments have been
 separated?
 
[1]
  
iii
  Draw a diagram to show how the chromatography
 apparatus was set up. Label
    the solvent     the origin line  [1]
CAMBRIDGE IGCSE EXAM QUESTIONS
292from Paper 2

--- Page 294 ---
  iv  During chromatography , the solvent evaporates 
and then diffuses through the chromatography 
jar. What do you understand by diffusion?
 
[1]
  
v
  Ethanol can be used as a solvent in
 
chromatography. Draw the formula for ethanol showing all atoms and bonds.
 
[1]
  
vi
  Which two of the following statements about
 
ethanol are true?
   
It is a carboxylic acid.
    It is a product of the fermentation of glucose.
   
It is an unsaturated compound.
    It is formed by the catalytic addition of steam to
 ethene.
 
[1]
 Cambridge IGCSE Chemistry 0620 Paper 2 Q3 November 2006
3 The diagram shows the structures of some  
substances containing carbon.
Ca2+CO2
3–
A
DE FBCH
C
HHH
HC
HHH
C HO
HCa2+CO2
3–Ca2+
CO23–
Ca2+CO23–
Ca2+CO23–
Ca2+CO23–
Ca2+CO23–
Ca2+
CO23–
Ca2+CO23–
Ca2+CO23–
CCH H
H HOC O
CC
CC CC
CC CCC
CC
C CC
CC
CC CC
CC CCC
CC
CC CC
CC
C CC
 a  Answer these questions using the letters A  – F.
  
i
 Which one of these structures is ionic?
 
[1]
  
ii
 Which one of them represents ethanol?
 
[1]
  
iii
  Which one of these structures represents 
 
a gas which turns limewater milky?
 
[1]
  
iv
  Which one of these structures is an 
unsaturated
 hydrocarbon?
 
[1]
 b
  Describe a chemical test for an unsaturated
 
hydrocarbon. Give the result of the test.
 
[2]
 c
 State the chemical name of structure B.
 
[1]
 d
  Structure F has several uses. Which one of 
 
the following is a correct use of structure F?
  
for cutting metals
  as a lubricant
  
for filling balloons
 as an insulator
 
[1]
 e
  The structures A to E are compounds. What 
 
do you understand by the term compound?
 
[1]
 f
 State the type of bonding in structure A.
 
[1]
 Cambridge IGCSE Chemistry 0620 Paper 2 Q1 June 20084 The table shows observations about the reactivity of
 various metals with dilute hydrochloric acid.
metal observations
calcium many bubbles produced rapidly with much spitting
copper no bubbles formed
iron a few bubbles produced very slowly
magnesium many bubbles produced rapidly with no spitting
 a  Put the metals in order of increasing reactivity.  [1 ]
 b  Zinc is between iron and magnesium in reactivity
. 
Suggest what observations will be made when 
zinc reacts with dilute hydrochloric acid.
 
[1]
 c
  Magnesium is extracted by the electrolysis 
 
of molten magnesium chloride.
anode (+)
iron cathode (–)molten magnesiuminert gas
molten magnesium
chloride
  i  What information in the diagram suggests 
that magnesium is less dense than molten 
magnesium chloride?
 
[1]
  
ii
  Magnesium is extracted by electrolysis
 rather 
than by heating its oxide with carbon. Why?
 
[1]
  
iii
  Suggest why a stream of inert gas is blown
  
over the surface of the molten magnesium.
 
[1]
  
iv
 Name a gaseous element which is inert.
 
[1]
 d  In some old magnesium manufacturing plants, coal  
gas is blown over the surface of the magnesium.  
The list shows the main substances in coal gas.
  
carbon monoxide
 ethene
 hydrogen
  
hydrogen sulfide
 methane
  
i
  Draw the structure of ethene showing all atoms and
 bonds.
 
[1]
  
ii
  Suggest two hazards of using coal gas by
 
referring to two specific substances in the list.
 [2]
 e
  Carbon monoxide can be removed from coal gas by
 mixing it with steam and passing the mixture 
over a catalyst of iron(III) oxide at 400
 
°C. 
CO 1 H2O    CO2 1 H2
  i   W rite a word equation for this reaction.  [1]
  ii
 What does the symbol
 
   mean?  [1]
  iii
  Iron(III) oxide reacts with acids to form a
 
solution containing iron(III) ions. Describe a test for aqueous iron(III) ions. Give the result.
 [2]
 Cambridge IGCSE Chemistry 0620 Paper 2 Q2 June 2009Your Cambridge igCSe Chemi StrY  exam
293

--- Page 295 ---
5 Hydrogen chloride can be made by burning 
hydrogen in chlorine.
 a
 Complete the equation for this reaction.
  
H2 1 …………...     … . HCl  [2]
 b
  Draw a dot and cross diagram for a molecule 
 
of hydrogen chloride. Show all the electrons.
  
Use o for an electron from a hydrogen atom.
  
Use x for an electron from a chlorine atom.
 [2]
 c
  Hydrochloric acid is formed when hydrogen chloride gas dissolves in water
. Suggest the pH 
of hydrochloric acid. Choose from this list.
    
pH1
  
pH7
  
pH9
  
pH13
 [1]
 d
  Complete the equation for the reaction of hydrochloric acid with zinc.
   zinc 
1 hydrochloric acid    zinc chloride  
1 ……………
 [1]
 e
  Describe how dry crystals of zinc chloride can be obtained from a solution of zinc chloride.
 [2]
 f
  A student electrolysed molten zinc chloride.
  
State the name of the product formed at
  
i
 the anode,
  
ii
  the cathode.
 [2]
 Cambridge IGCSE Chemistry 0620 Paper 2 Q7 June 2009
6 When Group I elements react with water , hydrogen 
gas is given off. The diagram shows the reaction of lithium, potassium and sodium with water.
 A C B
 a  Which one of these three elements A, B or C  
is lithium?
 [1]
 b i  Balance the equation for the reaction of sodium
 
with water by completing the lefthand side.
   
…....Na 1 .......H2O    2NaOH  1 H2 [1]
  
ii
  Apart from fizzing, describe two things that you
 
would see when sodium reacts with water.
 [2]
  
iii
  After the sodium had reacted with the water
, 
the solution was tested with red litmus paper.
   
What colour did the litmus paper turn?
   
Give a reason for your answer.
 [2]
  
iv
  Which two of the following statements about sodium are true?
  
 It is made by reducing sodium oxide with carbon.
  
It reacts with chlorine to form sodium chloride.
  
It reacts readily with oxygen.
   It only conducts electricity when molten.
 [2] c
  Rubidium also reacts with water
. How does  
the speed of reaction of rubidium with water compare with that of potassium with water?
 [1]
 d
  Sodium has only one stable isotope whereas potassium has several isotopes.
  
i
  What do you understand by the term isotopes?
 [1]
  
ii
  How many protons does sodium have
 in  
its nucleus? Use the Periodic Table to  
help you.
 [1]
 iii
  How many electrons are there in an atom 
 
of potassium?
 [1]
 iv
  Uranium has many isotopes. One of these is uranium-235 (
235U). What is the main use  
of this isotope of uranium?
 [1]
 Cambridge IGCSE Chemistry 0620 Paper 2 Q1 November 2006
7 The table shows the concentration of some ions present in seawater
.
name of ion formula of 
ionconcentration of ion in g 
 / dm3
bromide Br 2 0.07
calcium Ca
 21 0.04
chloride Cl
 2 19.1
magnesium Mg 21 1.2
potassium K
 1 0.3
sodium Na
 1 10.6
SO422 0.8
 a  Which negative ion has the highest 
concentration in seawater?
 [1]
 b
 Name the ion with the formula SO422 [1]
 c
  Which two ions in the table are formed from Group I elements?
 [1]
 d  When seawater is evaporated a number of dif
ferent 
compounds are formed. State the name of the compound present in the greatest quantity.
 [1]
 e
  
Names the four ions in the table which move to the cathode when seawater is electrolysed.
 [2]
 f
  When concentrated seawater is electrolysed, chlorine is formed at one of the electrodes.
  i
  T
o which Period in the Periodic Table does 
chlorine belong?
 [1]
  
ii
  Draw the electronic structure of a chlorine molecule. Show only the outer electrons.
 [2]
 g
  Drinking water can be obtained by purifying
 
seawater. Explain why distillation rather than filtration is used to purify seawater for drinking.
 [2]
 Cambridge IGCSE Chemistry 0620 Paper 2 Q3 June 2008Cambridge ig CSe exam que Stion S
294

--- Page 296 ---
8 Iron is extracted from its ore in a blast furnace.
 a
  State the name of the ore from which iron 
 
is extracted.
 [1] 
 b
 The diagram shows a blast furnace.
A
B
C
Dcoke + limestone
+ iron ore
ﬁrebrick lining
air in
  i  Which one of the raw materials is added to 
the blast furnace to help remove the impurities from the iron ore?
 [1]
  
ii
  The impurities are removed as a slag. Which letter on the diagram shows the slag?
 [1]
 c
  Carbon monoxide is formed in the blast furnace by reaction of coke with oxygen.
  
i
 Complete the equation for this reaction.
   
......
 
C 1 ............... 
   ...... CO  [2]
  
ii
  State the adverse af
fect of carbon monoxide 
on human health.
 [1]
 d
  In the hottest regions of the blast furnace 
 
the following reaction takes place.
  
Fe2O3 1 3C    2Fe   1   3CO
   Which two of these five sentences correctly 
 
describe this reaction?
  The iron oxide gets reduced
.
  The reaction is a thermal decomposition
.
  The carbon gets oxidised
.
  The carbon gets reduced
.
  Carbon neutralises the iron oxide
.
 [1]
 e  Aluminium cannot be extracted from aluminium
 
oxide in a blast furnace. Explain why aluminium cannot be extracted in this way.
 [2]
 f
 i
 State the name of the method used to extract 
 
  aluminium from its oxide ore.
 [1]
  ii
 State one use of aluminium.
 [1]
 Cambridge IGCSE Chemistry 0620 Paper 2 Q4 November 20089 Calcium carbonate, CaCO3, is the raw material 
used in the manufacture of lime, CaO.
 a
 i
  Describe how lime is manufactured from calcium carbonate.
 [1]
  
ii
 W
rite a symbol equation for this reaction.
 [1]
  
iii
 State one large scale use of lime.
 [1]
 b
  A student investigated the speed of reaction of calcium carbonate with hydrochloric acid using the apparatus shown below
.
  i
  Name the pieces labelled A to C.
 [3]
AB
C
reaction mixturewater bath
at 40 /H11034C
  ii The equation for the reaction is
   
CaCO3 1 2HCl    CaCl2 1 CO2 1 H2O
   
Write the word equation for this reaction.
 
[2]
  
iii
  The student carried out the reaction at 40
 °C 
using large pieces of calcium carbonate. 
 
The results are shown below. At what time did the reaction stop?
 [1]
0020406080100
20 40 60 80 100 120 140 160
time/secondscm3 gas re leased
  iv  The student repeated the experiment using 
the same mass of powdered calcium carbonate. All other
 conditions were kept  
the same. Copy the grid above and sketch  the graph for the reaction with calcium carbonate powder.
 [2]
  
v  How does the speed of reaction change
 when 
–  the concentration of hydrochloric acid   
    is decreased,  
–  the temperature is increased?
 [2]
 Cambridge IGCSE Chemistry 0620 Paper 2 Q3 November 2008Your Cambridge igCSe Chemi StrY  exam
295

--- Page 297 ---
10 The apparatus below can be used to measure the  
energy released when a liquid fuel is burnt. The 
amount of energy released is calculated from the increase in temperature of a known amount of water.
 iron can
water
ethanol
 a i   Explain how this experiment shows that  
the burning of ethanol is exothermic.
   
[1]
  
ii
  Complete the word equation for the 
 
complete combustion of ethanol. ethanol 1 oxygen 
   ............ . 1 ............  [2]
 b  Ethanol is a fuel containing carbon. Name two
 
other commonly used fuels containing carbon.
 [2
]
 c
  Give the formula of the functional group 
 
present in ethanol.
 [1]
 d
  The can contains water
. Describe a chemical  
test for water. Give the result of the test.
 [2]
 e  The iron can used in this experiment rusts easily
.
  i
  Describe a method which can be used to prevent iron from rusting.
 [1]
  ii
  Rust contains hydrated iron(III) oxide. What do you understand by the term hydrated?
 [1]
  iii
  Iron is a transition metal. State two 
typical 
properties of transition metals.
 [2]
 Cambridge IGCSE Chemistry 0620 Paper 2 Q5 November 2008
11 Some coal dust was heated with copper(II) oxide using the apparatus shown below
.
 coal dust and
copper(II) oxideplug of dampcotton wool
heat
 a  Coal contains carbon and various hydrocarbons. 
Carbon reduces the copper(II) oxide when heated.
  
i
  What do you understand by 
reduction?
 [1]
  ii
  At the end of the experiment a reddish-brown
 
solid remained in the tube. State its name.
 [1]
  iii
 The reddish brown solid conducts electricity
.
   
How could you show that it does so?
 [2] b
  During the experiment, water collected on 
 
the cooler parts of the test-tube.
  i
  Suggest where the hydrogen in the water 
 
comes from.
 [1]
  ii
  W
ater is a liquid. Describe the arrangement 
and motion of the particles in a liquid.
 [2]
 Cambridge IGCSE Chemistry 0620 Paper 2 Q5 November 2007
12 Some sunglasses are made from glass which 
darkens in bright sunlight. The glass contains
 tiny 
crystals of silver chloride and copper(I) chloride. 
 a
  In bright sunlight, in the presence of copper(I) chloride, the silver chloride breaks down
 to 
solid silver which darkens the glass.
  Ag
 (s) 1 e
 2    Ag( s)
  N
ame the particle with the symbol e
 2. [1]
 b
  Silver is a metal. State two physical properties which are characteristic of all metals.
 [2]
 c
  In bright sunlight, the copper(I) chloride in the sunglasses is converted to copper(II) chloride.
  
 What do the roman numerals (I) and (II) show 
 
 in these copper compounds? Choose one from 
 
 the number of copper atoms in the compounds
  
 the number of neutrons in the compound
s
  
 whether the copper is in the solid, liquid or 
   
 gaseous state
  
 the oxidation state of the copper in the
 
 compounds
 [1]
 d
  Describe a test for aqueous copper(II) ions.
 
Give the result of the test.
 [3]
 e
 Give a common use of copper
.
 [1]
 Cambridge IGCSE Chemistry 0620 Paper 2 Q5 June 2007
13 This question is about compounds.
 a  What do you understand by
 the term 
compound?
 [1]
 b
  Copy and complete the table below to show the formulae and uses of some compounds.
 [6]
compound relative number  
of atoms presentformula use
calcium 
oxideCa 5 1  
  
O 5 1CaO
sodium chlorideNa 5 1   Cl 5 1table salt
calcium carbonateCa 5 1  
 
  
C 5 1  
 
O 5 3
NH4NO3in fertilisers
 c  Calculate the relative formula mass of NH4NO3. [1]
 Cambridge IGCSE Chemistry 0620 Paper 2 Q4 November 2006Cambridge ig CSe exam que Stion S
296

--- Page 298 ---
14 The list shows part of the reactivity series.
  strontium
 more reactive
  calcium
  magnesium
  iron 
  copper
 less reactive
 a
  Calcium is manufactured by the electrolysis of 
molten calcium chloride. Suggest why calcium is extracted by electrolysis.
 [1]
 b
  Equal sized pieces of magnesium, strontium and calcium are placed in water
. Some 
observations about these reactions are shown  in the table. Complete the box for strontium.
metal observations
magnesium Gives off a few bubbles of gas with 
hot water. Dissolves very slowly.
calcium Gives off bubbles steadily with cold 
water. Dissolves slowly.
strontium
 [2]
 c
  When water is added to calcium carbide, 
acetylene and calcium hydroxide are formed. State a use for acetylene.
 [1]
 d
 A solution of calcium hydroxide is alkaline.
  
i
  Complete and balance the equation for 
 
the reaction of calcium hydroxide with hydrochloric acid.
   
Ca(OH)2 1 2HCl    CaCl2 1 ............  [1]
  
ii
 What type of chemical reaction is this?
 [1]
 e
  A student used the apparatus shown below to calculate the concentration of a solution of calcium hydroxide.
 calcium hydroxide solutionhydrochloric acidA
 i Name the piece of apparatus labelled A.  [1]
 ii
  Describe how the pH of the solution in the flask 
changes as the hydrochloric acid is added.
 [2]
 Cambridge IGCSE Chemistry 0620 Paper 2 Q5 November 200615 Petroleum is a mixture of hydrocarbons . It is 
separated into fractions such as petrol, paraffin and diesel.
 a Name the process used to separate the fractions
.
 [1]
 b
  Name two other fractions which are obtained from 
petroleum.
 [2]
 c
  Give one use for the paraf
fin fraction.
 [1]
 d
  Many of the compounds from petroleum are alkanes. Which two of 
these are alkanes?
 [1]
HCH
HHA
H H
H HC CB
H CH
HO HC
HCHHCH
HCH
HHD
HCHHHA
H H
H HCCB
H CHHO HC
HCHHCH
HCH
HHD
HCHHHA
H H
H HC CB
HCH
HOHC
HCHHCH
HCH
HHD
HCHHHA
H H
H HC CB
H CH
HO HC
HC
HH
CH
HCH
HHD
 e  Use words from the list below to complete  
the following sentence.
  ethane
 ethene
 hydrogen
 nitrogen
  oxygen
 reactive
 unreactive
 water
   Alkanes such as
 i
...............are generally 
ii..............but they can be burnt in
 iii
..............
to form carbon dioxide and ................
 [4]
 f
  Alkanes are saturated hydrocarbons. What do you  
understand by
 i
 saturated, ii hydrocarbon?
 [2]
 Cambridge IGCSE Chemistry 0620 Paper 2 Q3 June 2009
16 a  Choose from the list of compounds to answer 
questions 
i to v. Each compound can be used 
once, more than once, or not at all. 
  
calcium carbonate
  
carbon dioxide 
  
hydrogen chloride
  
iron(III) oxide
  
lead(II) bromide
  
methane
  
sodium hydroxide
  
Name the compound which
  
i
 is a transition metal compound,
 [1]
  
ii
  produces brown fumes at the anode 
 
when electrolysed,
 [1]
  
iii
 is used to manufacture lime,
 [1]
  
iv
 form
s an alkaline solution in water,
 [1]
  
v
 is the main constituent of natural gas.
 [1]
 b
  At a high temperature iron(III) oxide is reduced by carbon
: Fe2O3 1 3C    2Fe  1 3CO
  
i
  Explain how the equation shows that iron(III) oxide is reduced by carbon.
 [1]
  
ii
  Copy and complete these sentences about the extraction of iron using words from the list.
   
bauxite
 blast
 converter
 hematite
   
lime
 limestone
 sand
 slag
    Iron is extracted from ........ by mixing the ore
 
with coke and ........ in a ........ furnace. The 
iron ore is reduced to iron. Impurities in the ore react with calcium oxide to form ........ 
  [4]
 Cambridge IGCSE Chemistry 0620 Paper 2 Q1 June 2009Your Cambridge igCSe Chemi StrY  exam
297

--- Page 299 ---
1 Use your copy of the periodic table to help you 
answer these questions.
 a
  Predict the formula of 
each of the following 
compounds.
  
i
 barium oxide   
ii boron oxide
 [2]
 b
  Give the formula
 of the following ions.
  
i
 sulfide
   
ii
 gallium
 [2]
 c
  Draw a diagram showing the arrangement of the valency electrons in one molecule of the covalent compound nitrogen trichloride.
   Use 
x to represent an electron from a nitrogen 
atom. 
 Use o to represent an electron from a 
  
chlorine atom.
 [3]
 d
  Potassium and vanadium are elements in 
 
Period IV. 
  
i
  State two dif
ferences in their physical 
properties.
 [2]
  
ii
  Give two dif
ferences in their chemical 
properties.
 [2]
 e
  Fluorine and astatine are halogens. 
 
Use your knowledge of the other halogens  to predict the following:
  
i
 
the physical state of fluorine at r.t.p.
   
the physical state of astatine at r.t.p.
 [2]
  
ii
  two similarities in their chemical properties.
 [2]
 Cambridge IGCSE Chemistry 0620 Paper 3 Q4 June 2007
2 Across the world, food safety   
agencies are investigating the  
presence of minute traces of  
the toxic hydrocarbon, benzene,  
in soft drinks.
 It is formed by the reduction of  
 sodium benzoate by vitamin C.
 
 
a
  Sodium benzoate is a salt. 
 
It has the formula C6H5COONa.  
It can be made by neutralising benzoic acid 
using sodium hydroxide.
  
i
  Deduce the formula of benzoic acid.
 [1]
  
ii
  W
rite a word equation for the reaction between 
benzoic acid and sodium hydroxide.
 [1]
  
iii
  Name two other compounds that would react with benzoic acid to form sodium benzoate.
 [2]INGREDIENTS
Orange juice,
sodium benzoate,
vitamin C b  Benzene contains 92.3% of carbon and its 
relative molecular mass is 78.
  
i
  What is the percentage of hydrogen in benzene?
 
[1]
  
ii
  Calculate the ratio of moles of C atoms: moles of H atoms in benzene.
 [2]
  
iii
  Calculate its empirical formula and 
 
then its molecular formula.
 [2]
 c 
 This shows the structural
  
formula of Vitamin C.
  
i
  What is its molecular formula?
 [1]
  
ii
  Name the two functional groups that are circled.
 
[2]
 Cambridge IGCSE Chemistry 0620 Paper 3 Q4 November 2008
3 Th e following is a list of the electron distributions 
of atoms of unknown elements.
element electron distribution
A 2,6
B 2,8,4
C 2,8,8,2
D 2,8,18,8
E 2,8,18,8,1
F 2,8,18,18,7
 a  Choose an element  from the list for each of  
the following descriptions.
  
i
 It is a noble gas.
  
ii
 It is a soft metal with a low density
.
  
iii
  It can form
 a covalent compound with 
element A.
  
iv
  It has a giant covalent structure similar to diamond.
  
v
  It is a diatomic gas with molecules of 
the 
type X2. [5]
 b
  Elements C and 
A can form an ionic compound.
  
i
  Draw a diagram that shows the formula of this compound, the charges on the ions
, and 
the arrangement of the valency electrons around the negative ion. 
    Use o to represent 
an electron from an atom  
of C. Use x to represent an electron from  an atom of A.
 [3]
  
ii
  Predict two properties of this compound.
 [2]
 Cambridge IGCSE Chemistry 0620 Paper 3 2 Q3 June 2009O
HO OHOH HC
CCC CO
CHH H
OH
CAMBRIDGE IGCSE EXAM QUESTIONS
298from Paper 3

--- Page 300 ---
4 The results of experiments on electrolysis using 
inert electrodes are given in the table.
electrolyte change at 
negative electrodechange at positive electrodechange to electrolyte
molten  lead(II)  bromidelead formed bromine 
formedused up
a 
 ……………
 
……………potassium  formediodine  formedused up
dilute aqueous  sodium chlorideb 
 …………
 
…………c 
 …………
 
…………d ………
aqueous  copper(II)  sulfatee 
 …………
 
…………f 
 …………
 
…………g 
 ………
.. 
………..
h 
 …………
 
…………hydrogen formedbromine formedpotassium hydroxide formed
 Complete the table; the first line has been 
completed as an example.
 [8]
 Cambridge IGCSE Chemistry 0620 Paper 3 Q2 June 2009
5 An ore of copper is the mineral, chalcopyrite.  
This is a mixed sulfide of iron and copper.
 a
  Analysis of a sample of this ore shows that 
 
13.80 g of the ore contained 4.80 g of copper, 4.20 g of iron and the rest sulfur.
  
i
 Copy and complete the table.
 [3]
copper iron sulfur
composition by 
mass /
 g 4.80 4.20
number of moles of atoms
simplest mole 
ratio of atoms
  ii Find the empirical formula of chalcopyrite.  [1]
 b
  Impure copper is extracted from the ore. 
 
This copper is refined by electrolysis.
  
i
 Name
    
 A: 
 the material used for the positive 
electrode (anode), 
    
 B: 
 the material used for the negative electrode
 (cathode),
    C: a suitable electrolyte.
 [3]
  
ii
  W
rite an ionic equation for the reaction at 
the negative electrode.
 [1]
  
iii
  One use of this pure copper is electrical conductors, another is to make alloys. 
 
Name the metal that is alloyed with  copper to make brass.
 [1] c  T
wo of the elements in chalcopyrite are the metal, 
copper, and the non-metal, sulfur. These have different properties. Copper is an excellent conductor of electricity and is malleable. Sulfur is a poor conductor and is not malleable, it is brittle. Explain, in terms of their structures, why this is so.
  
i
 dif
ference in electrical conductivity
 [2]
  
ii
 dif
ference in malleability
 [2]
 Cambridge IGCSE Chemistry 0620 Paper 3 Q6 November 2006
6  There are three types of giant structure – ionic, metallic and macromolecular
.
 a 
 Sodium nitride is an ionic compound. Draw a
 
diagram that shows the formula of the compound, the charges on the ions, and the arrangement of the valency electrons around the negative ion.  
Use x to represent an electron from a sodium atom. Use o to represent an electron from a nitrogen atom.
  
   
 [3] 
 b
 i
 Describe metallic bonding.
 [3]
  
ii
  Use the above ideas to explain why metals are
   
A: good conductors of electricity
 [1]
   
B: metals are malleable.
 [2]
 c  Silicon(IV) oxide has a macromolecular structure.
  
i
  Describe the structure of silicon(IV) oxide 
 
(a diagram is not acceptable).
 [3]
  
ii
  Diamond has a similar structure and consequently similar properties. Give two physical properties common to both diamond and silicon(IV) oxide.
 [2] 
 Cambridge IGCSE Chemistry 0620 Paper 3 Q2 November 2008
7 Calcium carbonate is an important raw material.
 a
  Name a rock made up of calcium carbonate.
 [1]
 b
  When calcium carbonate is heated strongly
, it 
decomposes:  CaCO3    CaO  1   CO2
  i  Calculate the relative formula mass 
   
of CaCO3. [1]
  
ii
  Calculate the relative formula mass of CaO
.
 [1]
  
iii
  7.00 kg of calcium oxide was formed. What mass of calcium carbonate was heated?
 [2]
 c
 Calcium carbonate 
is used to control soil acidity.
  
i
 Why is it important to control soil acidity?
 [1]
  
ii
  Both calcium carbonate, insoluble in water
, 
and calcium oxide, slightly soluble, are used to increase soil pH. Suggest two advantages of using calcium carbonate.
 [2]
  
iii
  Give one use of calcium carbonate other than for making calcium oxide and controlling soil pH.
 [1]
 Cambridge IGCSE Chemistry 0620 Paper 3 Q3 November 2006Your Cambridge igCSe Chemi StrY  exam
299

--- Page 301 ---
8 Iron is a transition element.
 a
  Which three of the following six statements 
about transition elements are correct?
  
i
  The metals are highly coloured e.g. yellow
, 
green, blue.
  
ii
 The metals have low melting points.
  
iii
 Their compounds are highly coloured.
  
iv
 Their compounds are colourless.
  
v
  The elements and their compounds are 
 
often used as catalysts.
  
vi
 They have more than one oxidation state.
 [3]
 b
 i
  In which Period in the Periodic T
able  
is iron?
 [1]
  
ii
  Use the Periodic T
able to work out the 
number of protons and the number of neutrons in one atom of iron.
 [1]
 c
  Iron is extracted in a blast furnace. The list below gives some of the substances used or formed in the extraction.
   carbon monoxide
   coke   iron ore   limestone   slag
  
i
  Which substance is a mineral containing largely calcium carbonate?
 [1]
  
ii
  Which substance is formed when impurities in the ore react with calcium oxide?
 [1]
  
iii
 Which substance is also called hematite?
 [1]
 d
  State two functions of the coke used in the 
 
blast furnace.
 [2]
 e
  Most of the iron is converted into mild steel 
 
or stainless steel. Give one use for each.
 [2]
 Cambridge IGCSE Chemistry 0620 Paper 3 Q1 June 2006
9  The first three elements in Group IV are  
carbon, silicon, germanium.
 a
  The element germanium has a diamond-type structure. Describe the structure of germanium. 
  
A diagram is acceptable.
 [2]
 b
  Unlike diamond, graphite is soft and is 
 
a good conductor of electricity.
  
i Explain why graphite has these properties.
 [3]
  
ii
  Give a use of graphite that depends on 
 
one of these properties.
 [1]
 c
  Carbon dioxide and silicon(IV) oxide have similar formulae but dif
ferent types of structure.
  
i
 Give the formulae of these oxides.
 [1]
  
ii
 How are their structures dif
ferent?
 [2]
 d
  All these elements form compounds w
ith 
hydrogen called hydrides. The saturated hydrides of carbon are the alkanes. Predict the formula of the hydride of germanium which contains two germanium atoms. 
 Cambridge IGCSE Chemistry 0620 Paper 3 Q4 June 200610 Zinc is extracted from zinc blende, ZnS.
 a
  Zinc blende is heated in air to give zinc oxide and sulfur dioxide. 
 
Most of the sulfur dioxide is used to make sulfur trioxide. This is used to manufacture sulfuric acid. Some of the acid is used in the plant, but most of it is used to make fertilisers.
  
i
 Give another use of sulfur dioxide.
 [1]
  
ii
  Describe how sulfur dioxide is converted 
 
into sulfur trioxide.
 [3]
  
iii
 Name a fertiliser made from sulfuric acid.
 [1]
 b
  Some of the zinc oxide was mixed with an excess of carbon and heated to 1000 °C. 
 
Zinc distils out of the furnace.
2ZnO 1 C 
   2Zn  1 CO2
 C  1 CO2    2CO
  
i
  Name the two changes of state involved in the process of distillation.
 [2]
  
ii
  Why is it necessary to use an excess of carbon?
 [2]
 c
  The remaining zinc oxide reacts with 
 
sulfuric acid to give aqueous zinc sulfate.  This is electrolysed with inert electrodes  (the electrolysis is the same as that of  copper(II) sulfate with inert electrodes). 
   Ions present: Zn21(aq) SO422 (aq)  H1(aq) 
OH2(aq). 
i
  Zinc forms at the negative electrode (cathode). W
rite the equation for this 
reaction.
 [1]
  
ii
  W
rite the equation for the reaction at  
the positive electrode (anode).
 [2]
  
iii
  Complete this sentence:
  
The electrolyte changes from aqueous zinc sulfate to .................
 [1]
 d
 Give two uses of zinc.
 [2]
 Cambridge IGCSE Chemistry 0620 Paper 3 Q4 November 2007
11 Aluminium is extracted by the electrolysis of  
a molten mixture that contains alumina, which  is aluminium oxide, Al
2O3.
 a
  The ore of aluminium is bauxite. This contains alumina, which is amphoteric, and iron(III) oxide, which is basic. The ore is heated with aqueous sodium hydroxide.
  
Complete the following sentences.
   The 
i….…... dissolves to give a solution of 
ii.……...
   The 
iii……….does not dissolve and can be 
removed by iv………..
 [4]Cambridge ig CSe exam que Stion S
300

--- Page 302 ---
 b Complete the labelling of the diagram.
waste gases
carbon anode (+)
temperature is iv ..................iii ..................mixture of aluminium
oxide and ii ..................i ..................
.................. (–)
 c  The ions  involved in the electrolysis are  
Al31 and O22.
  
i
  W
rite an equation for the reaction at the 
cathode.
 [2]
  
ii
  Explain how carbon dioxide is formed at 
 
the anode. 
 [2]
 d
  Give an explanation for each of the following.
  
i
  Aluminium is used extensively in the 
manufacture of aircraft.
 [1]
  
ii
 Aluminium is used 
for food containers.
 [2]
  
iii
  Aluminium electricity cables have a steel core.
 [1]
 Cambridge IGCSE Chemistry 0620 Paper 3 Q6 June 2007
12 a  Four bottles were known to contain aqueous  
ammonia, dilute hydrochloric acid, sodium hydroxide solution and vinegar, which is dilute ethanoic acid. The bottles had lost their labels. The pH values of the four solutions were 1, 4,  
10 and 13. Complete the table.
 [
2]
solution pH
aqueous ammonia
dilute hydrochloric acidsodium hydroxide solutionvinegar
 b  The following apparatus was set up to investigate  
the electrical conductivity of dilute acids.
  + –
carbon
cathode
bubbles ofhydrogen gasbulb/lamp
carbon
anode
dilute sulfuric acid
bubbles of
oxygen gas
   Dilute sulfuric acid is a strong acid. If it was 
replaced by a weak acid, what two dif
ferences in 
the observations would you expect to make?
 [2] c
  When nitric acid is added to water the following reaction occurs.
HNO
3 1 H2O  NO32 1 H3O1
   Give the name and the formula of the particle transferred from nitric acid to water 
.
 [2]
 d
 This question is about the following oxides. 
  
aluminium oxide
 Al2O3
  calcium oxide  CaO
  carbon dioxide
 CO2
  carbon monoxide  CO
  magnesium oxide
 MgO
  sulfur dioxide
 SO2
  i  Which will react with hydrochloric acid but not with aqueous sodium hydroxide? 
 [1]
  
ii
  Which will react with aqueous sodium hydroxide but not with hydrochloric acid?
 [1]
  
iii
  Which will react both with hydrochloric acid and aqueous sodium hydroxide?
 [1]
  
iv
  Which will react neither with hydrochloric acid nor with aqueous sodium hydroxide?
 [1]
 Cambridge IGCSE Chemistry 0620 Paper 3 Q3 June 2006
13  Hydrogen reacts with the halogens to form hydrogen halides.
 a
  Bond energy is the amount of energy
, in kJ,  
that must be supplied (endothermic) to break one mole of a bond.
bond bond energy in kJ  /  mol
H
2H 1436
F2F 1158
H2F 1562
   Use the above data to show that the following reaction is exothermic.
    
H H 1 F F    2H F [3]
 b
 They react with water to form acidic solutions.
     HCl
 1 H2O    H3O1 1 Cl2
      HF  1 H2O    H3O1 1 F2
  i  Explain why water behaves as a base in  
both of these reactions.
 [2]
  
ii
  At equilibrium, only 1% of the hydrogen chloride exists as molecules, the rest has formed ions. In the other equilibrium, 97% of the hydrogen fluoride exists as molecules, only 3% has formed ions. What does this tell you about the strength of each acid?
 [2]
  
iii
  How would the pH of these two solutions dif
fer?
 
[1]
 Cambridge IGCSE Chemistry 0620 Paper 3 2 Q7 June 2009Your Cambridge igCSe Chemi StrY  exam
301

--- Page 303 ---
14 The reactivity series lists metals in order of 
reactivity
. To find out which is more reactive,  
zinc or tin, this experiment could be carried out.
 tin(II) nitrate(aq)zinc surface still
shiny meansNO REACTION (NR)
zinc surface covere d
with a grey deposit means
REACTION (R)piece of zinc
shiny surface
 a  The experiment could be carried out with  
other metals and the results recorded in a table. 
Then the order of reactivity can be deduced.
  
i
 The order was found to be:
  
 manganese
 most reactive
  
 zinc
  
 tin
  
 silver
 least reactive
  
 Copy and complete this table of results 
 
 
 from which the order was determined.
 [3]
aqueous  
solutiontin Sn manganese 
Mnsilver  
Agzinc 
Zn
tin(II) nitrate R NR R
manganese(II)  
nitrate
silver(I) nitratezinc nitrate
  ii   W rite the ionic equation for the reaction 
between tin atoms and silver(I) ions.
 [2]
  iii
 The following is a redox reaction.
   
Mn 1 Sn21    Mn21 1 Sn
   
Indicate on the equation the change which is  
  
oxidation. Give a reason for your choice.
 [2]
  iv
  Explain why experiments of this type cannot 
be used to find the position of aluminium 
 
in the reactivity series.
 [2]
 b
  Potassium and calcium are very reactive 
 
metals at the top of the series. Because their ions have different charges, K
1 and Ca21, their 
compounds behave differently when heated.
  
i
 Explain why the ions have dif
ferent  
  
charges.
 [2]
  
ii
  Their hydroxides are heated. If the compound
  
decomposes, complete the word equation.  
If it does not decompose, write ‘ no reaction’. 
Potassium hydroxide  ...............  
Calcium hydroxide  ...............  [2]  iii  Complete the equations for the decomposition of their nitrates.
   
2KNO3  .................  1  ...............
    2Ca(NO3)2  ..........  1  .............. 1 ............. 
 [4]
 Cambridge IGCSE Chemistry 0620 Paper 3 1 Q6 November 2008
15 The fractional distillation of crude oil usually produces large quantities of the heavier fractions. The market demand is for the lighter fractions and for the more reactive alkenes. The heavier fractions are cracked to form smaller alkanes and alkenes as in the following example.
    
C8H18    C4H10 1 C4H8 
  
 
octane
 butane
 butenes
 a
 i
  W
rite a different equation for the cracking  
of octane.
   
C8H18    .............  1 ..................  [1]
  
ii
  The cracking of octane can produce isomers with the molecular formula C
4H8. Draw the 
structural formulae of two of these isomers. 
 
[2]
 
b
 i
  Give the essential condition for the reaction between chlorine and butane.
 [1]
  
ii
 What type of reaction is this?
 [1]
  
iii
  This reaction produces a mixture of products.
 
Give the names of two products that contain four carbon atoms per molecule.
 [2]
 c  Alkenes are more reactive than alkanes and
  
are used to make a range of organic chemicals. Propene, CH
3–CH5 CH2, is made by cracking. 
Give the structural formula of the addition product when propene reacts with these.
  
i
 water
   
ii
 bromine
 [2]
 d
  Propene reacts with hydrogen iodide to form 
 
2-iodopropane.
   
CH32CH5CH2 1 HI  CH32CHI2CH3
   1.4 g of propene produced 4.0 g of 2-iodopropane.Calculate the percentage yield.
  
i
 moles of CH32CH5CH2 reacted  5
  
ii
  maximum moles of CH3-CHI-CH3 that could 
be formed
 5
 
mass of one mole of CH3-CHI-CH3 is 170 g
  
iii
  maximum mass of 2-iodopropane that 
 
could be formed
 5
  
iv
 percentage yield
 5
 
[4]
 Cambridge IGCSE Chemistry 0620 Paper 3 Q7 June 2006Cambridge ig CSe exam que Stion S
302

--- Page 304 ---
16 The alcohols form a homologous series.  
The first four members are methanol, ethanol, 
propan-1-ol and butan-1-ol.
 a  One characteristic of a homologous series is that
 
the physical properties vary in a predictable way. The table below gives the heats of combustion of the first three alcohols.
alcohol formula heat of 
combustion in kJ
 
/
 
mole
methanol CH3OH 2730
ethanol CH3-CH2-OH 21370
propan-1-ol CH3-CH2-CH2-OH  –2020
butan-1-ol CH3-CH2-CH2-CH2-OH
  i  The minus sign indicates there is less chemical  
energy in the products than in the reactants.  
In what form is the energy given out?
 [1]
  ii
 Is the reaction exothermic or endothermic?
 [1]
  iii
  Complete the equation for the complete 
 
combustion of ethanol.
   
C2H5OH 1  ....O2  ...............  1 ..............  
 [2]
  iv
  Determine the heat of combustion of butan-
1-ol by plotting the heats of combustion of the first three
 alcohols against the number  
of carbon atoms per molecule.  Label your graph as on the right. 
 
  What is the heat of combustion of 
 
 
 butan-1-ol 
in kJ
 
/
 
mol?
 [3]
  
v
  Describe two other characteristics of homologous series.
 [2]
 b
  Give the name and structural formula of 
 
an isomer of propan-1-ol.
 [2]
 c
  Methanol is made from carbon monoxide.
  
CO (g) 1 2H2 (g)    CH3OH (g)
  
The forward reaction is exothermic.
 i
  Describe how hydrogen is obtained from alkanes.
 [2]
 ii
  Suggest a method of making carbon
 monoxide 
from methane.
 [2]
 iii
  Which condition, high or low pressure, would give the maximum yield of methanol? Give a reason for your choice.
 [2] d
  For each of the following predict the name of the organic product.
  
i
  reaction between methanol and ethanoic acid
 [1]
  
ii
  oxidation of propan-1-ol by potassium
 
dichromate(VI)
 [1]
  
iii
 removal of H2O from ethanol  
  
(dehydration)
 [1]
 Cambridge IGCSE Chemistry 0620 Paper 3 Q6 November 2007
17 Copy and complete the following table.
gas test for gas
ammonia
bleaches damp litmus paper
hydrogen
relights a glowing splint
turns limewater milky
 [5]
 Cambridge IGCSE Chemistry 0620 Paper 3 Q1 November 2008
–700
–800–900
–1000–1100–1200–1300–1400–1500–1600–1700–1800–1900–2000–2100–2200–2300–2400
–2500
–2600–2700–280012number of carbon atoms per molecule
34
heat of
combustion/
kJ/molYour Cambridge igCSe Chemi StrY  exam
303

--- Page 305 ---
1 The colours present in some blackcurrant sweets 
can be separated by chromatography
. The colours 
are water-soluble dyes. The diagrams show how  the colours can be extracted from the sweets.
 AB
C
 a  Name the pieces of apparatus labelled A to C.  [3]
 The apparatus below was used to carry out 
 
the chromatography.
  solventchromatography
paperbeakerglass cover
 b i  Name the solvent used.  [1] 
  
ii
  Label, with an arrow
, the origin on the 
diagram.  
 
[1]
 
c
  On a larger copy of this 
 
rectangle, sketch the  
chromatogram you would  expect if two different colours  were present in the sweets.
 
[1]
 Cambridge IGCSE Chemistry 0620 Paper 6 Q1 November 2008
2 Describe a chemical test to distinguish between each of the following pairs of substances. 
 Example
: hydrogen and carbon dioxide 
test: lighted splint result: with hydrogen gives a pop result: with carbon dioxide splint is extinguished
 a
 zin
c carbonate and zinc chloride
 
[2]
 
b
 ammonia and chlorine
 
[3]
 c
  aqueous iron(
II) sulfate and aqueous  
iron(III) sulfate
 [
3]
 Cambridge IGCSE Chemistry 0620 Paper 6 Q3 June 20093 A student investigated the addition of four  
different solids, A, B, C and D, to water.  Five experiments were carried out.
Experiment 1By using a measuring cylinder, 30 cm
3 of distilled 
water was poured into a polystyrene cup and the initial temperature of the water was measured. 4 g of solid A was added to the cup and the mixture stirred with a thermometer. The temperature of  the solution was measured after 2 minutes.
30
25
20
initial temperature30
25
20
ﬁnal temperature
Experiment 2
Experiment 1 was repeated using 4 g of solid B.
30
25
20
initial temperature30
25
20
ﬁnal temperature
Experiment 3
Experiment 1 was repeated using 4 g of solid C.
30
25
20
initial temperature20
15
10
ﬁnal temperature
Experiment 4
Experiment 1 was repeated using 4 g of solid D.
30
25
20
initial temperature30
25
20
ﬁnal temperature
CAMBRIDGE IGCSE EXAM QUESTIONS
304from paper 6

--- Page 306 ---
Experiment 5
A little of the solution from Experiment 4 was added to a little of the solution from Experiment 2 in  a test-tube. The observations were recorded.
observations
a fast reaction vigorous effervescence and bubbles produced
 a  Copy out the table and use the thermometer
 
diagrams for Experiments 1–4 to record the initial and final temperatures. Calculate and record the temperature difference in the table.
 
expt initial 
temperature
 / °Cfinal  
temperature
 / °Cdif ference  
 / °C
1
234
 [4]
 b
  Draw a labelled bar chart of the results to 
Experiments 1, 2, 3 and 4 on graph paper
.  
Label your bar chart as shown below.
 [
4]
  +10
temperature
difference /ºC+5
0
–5
–10
  Use the results and observations from Experiments 1 – 5 to answer the following questions.
 c
 
i
  Which solid dissolves in water to produce 
 
an exothermic reaction?
 
[1]
  
ii
 Give a reason why you chose this solid.
 
[1]
 d
  Which Experiment produced the largest temperature change?
 [
1]
 e
  Predict the temperature change that would happen if
  
i
 8 g of solid 
B was used in Experiment 2,
 [
1]
  
ii
  60 cm3 of water was used in Experiment 4. 
 
[1]
  
iii
 Explain your answer to 
e ii.
 
[2]
 f
  Suggest an explanation for the observations 
 
in Experiment 5.
 [
2]
 Cambridge IGCSE Chemistry 0620 Paper 6 Q4 November 20084 Hydrogen peroxide breaks down to form oxygen. 
The volume 
of oxygen given off can be measured using this apparatus.  
 Solids W and X both catalyse the breakdown of hydrogen peroxide. The syringe diagrams show 
 
the volume of oxygen formed every 20 seconds using these catalysts at 25 °C.
10 02 03 04 0
10 02 03 04 0
10 02 03 04 0
10 02 03 04 0
10 02 03 04 010 02 03 04 0
10 02 03 04 0
10 02 03 04 0
10 02 03 04 0
10 02 03 04 0
10 02 03 04 010 02 03 04 00time/s using catalyst W using catalyst X
20
40
60
80
100
 a  Copy the table. Use the gas syringe diagrams  
to complete it.
time  / s volume of oxygen  / cm3
catalyst W catalyst X
0
20
406080
100
 [3]
 b
  Plot a graph to show each set of results. 
 
Clearly label the curves.
 [
6]
 c
  Which solid is the better catalyst in this 
reaction? Give a reason for your choice.
 
[2]
 d
  Why is the final volume of oxygen the same 
 
in each experiment?
 [
1]
 e
  Sketch a line on the grid to show the shape 
 
of the graph you would expect if the reaction  with catalyst X was repeated at 40
 °C.
 
[2]
 Cambridge IGCSE Chemistry 0620 Paper 6 Q6 June 200710 02 03 04 0 50
gas syringeYour Cambridge igCSe Chemi StrY  exam
305

--- Page 307 ---
5 An experiment was carried out to determine  
the solubility of potassium chlorate at different 
temperatures. The solubility is the mass of potassium chlorate that dissolves in 100 g of water. 
 The results obtained are shown in the table below
.
temperature  /  °C 0 10 20 30 40 50 60
solubility in 
g
  
/
 100
 g of water 14 17 20 24 29 34 40
 a  Draw a smooth line graph to show the solubility 
of potassium chlorate at dif
ferent temperatures. 
Label your graph as shown below.
40
solubility in
g/100 g water
temperature / ºC3050
20
10
0
40 30 50 60 70 20 10 0
 [4]
 b
  Use your graph to determine the solubility of 
potassium chlorate at 70
 °C. Show clearly on 
 
the graph how you obtained your answer.
 [
2]
 c
  What would be the ef
fect of cooling a saturated 
solution of potassium chlorate from 60
 °
C  
to 20
 °C?
 [
2]
 Cambridge IGCSE Chemistry 0620 Paper 6 Q6 November 2008
6  The diagram shows the formation of a solution  
of magnesium hydroxide from magnesium.
Universal
indicator
solution
solution ofmagnesiumhydroxide
indicator
turns
bluemagnesium
oxidewater
magnesium
burning to form
magnesium
oxide heatA
BC
 a Name the pieces of apparatus labelled A – C.  [3]
 b
  What type of chemical reaction is the 
 
burning of magnesium?
 [
1]
 c
  Suggest a pH for the solution of magnesium 
hydroxide.
 
[1]
 Cambridge IGCSE Chemistry 0620 Paper 6 Q1 November 20067 The diagram shows an experiment to pass electricity through lead bromide. Electricity has 
 
no effect on solid lead bromide.
 d.c.power supply
bulb
LEAD
BROMIDE
TOXIC
heat
 a i   Copy the diagram and clearly label the electrodes. 
 
[1]
  
ii
  Suggest a suitable material to make the electrodes.
 
[1]
 b
  Give two observations expected when the 
 
lead bromide is heated to melting point.
 [2]
 c
  State two dif
ferent safety precautions when 
carrying out this experiment.
 [2]
 Cambridge IGCSE Chemistry 0620 Paper 6 Q2 June 2008
8 Concentrated hydrochlori c  acid can be electrolysed 
using the apparatus shown.
 
 a  Copy the diagram and label the position of  
the electrodes.
 [
1]
 b
  Give two observations when the circuit is switched on.
 [2]
 c
 
i
  Name the product at the positive electrode.
 [1]
  
ii
  State a test for this product, and the result.
 [
2]
 Cambridge IGCSE Chemistry 0620 Paper 6 Q2 June 2007Cambridge ig CSe exam que Stion S
306

--- Page 308 ---
9 A student investigated the reaction between 
potassium manganate(V
II) and a metallic salt 
solution. Two experiments were carried out.
 Experiment 1
 a
  About 1 cm3 of aqueous sodium hydroxide  
was added to a little of the salt solution A  and the observation noted.
  
observation
  
green precipitate formed
 b
  A burette was filled with potassium manganate(V
II) 
solution up to the 0.0 cm3 mark. 
   By using a measuring cylinder
, 25 cm3 of 
solution A of the salt was placed into a conical flask. The flask was shaken to mix the contents.
   The potassium manganate(V
II) solution was 
added to the flask, and shaken to mix thoroughly. Addition of potassium manganate(VII) solution was continued until there was a pale pink colour in the contents of the flask.  
   Copy the table of results 
below.  
Burette readings / cm3
Experiment 1 Experiment 2
final reading
initial readingdifference
   Use th is burette diagram  
to record the volume and  
complete the column  for Experiment 1 in  the table.
 
 Experiment 2
 c
  Experiment 
1b was repeated using a different 
solution B of the salt, instead of solution A. 
   Use the burette diagrams to record the volumes 
in the table and complete the table.
15
1617
initial reading282930
ﬁnal reading
 [4] d  About 1 cm3 of aqueous sodium hydroxide was 
added to a little of the solution in the flask and 
the observation noted.
  
observation
  
red-brown precipitate
 e i
  In which 
experiment was the greatest volume 
of potassium manganate(VII) solution used?
 [1]
  
ii
  Compare the volumes of potassium manganate(V
II) solution used in 
Experiments 1 and 2.
 
[2]
  
iii
  Suggest an explanation for the dif
ference  
in the volumes.
 [
2]
 f  Predict the volume of potassium manganate(V
II) 
solution which would be needed to react completely with 50 cm
3 of solution B . [2]
 g
  Explain one change that could be made to the experimental method to obtain more accurate results. 
 [
2]
 h
  What conclusion can you draw about the salt solution from:
  
i
 experiment 
1a,
 [
1] 
 i
i
 experiment 
2d?
 
[1]
 Cambridge IGCSE Chemistry 0620 Paper 6 Q4 June 2008
10  This label is from a container of ‘Bite Relief’ solution.
 BITE  RELIEF
FOR
 FAST RELIEF FROM INSECT 
BITES AND STINGS
Active ingredient: ammoniaAlso contains water and alcohol
DIRECTIONS FOR USE: Use cotton wool to 
dab the solution on the affected area of the skin.
 a  Give a chemical test to show the presence of ammonia in Bite Relief solution. 
 
Give the result of the test.
 [
2]
 b
  What practical method could be used to separate the mixture of alcohol (b
.p. 78
 °C) 
 
and water (b.p. 100
 °C)?
 
[2]
 c
  Give a chemical test to show the presence 
 
of water. Give the result of the test.
 
[2]
 d
  What would be the ef
fect of touching the 
alcohol with a lighted splint?
 
[1]    
 Cambridge IGCSE Chemistry 0620 Paper 6 Q7 June 200825
2627
ﬁnal readingYour Cambridge igCSe Chemi StrY  exam
307

--- Page 309 ---
11 T wo solids, S and V, were analysed. S was copper(II) oxide.  
The tests on the solids, and some of the observations, are  
in the following table. Write down the observations that  are missing from the table.
 
test observation
tests on solid S 
a
 Appearance of solid 
S black solid
 b
  Hydrogen peroxide was added to solid S in a test-tube.  
A glowing splint was inserted into the tubeslow ef
fervescence
splint relit
 c
  Dilute sulfuric
 acid was added to solid S in a test-tube. 
The mixture was heated to boiling point.
   The solution was divided into three equal portions
 
into test-tubes.
  
i
  T
o the first portion of the solution excess sodium 
hydroxide was added.
  
ii
  T
o the second portion of the solution, about  
1 cm3 of aqueous ammonia solution was added.
 
      
Excess ammonia solution was then added.
  
iii
  T
o the third portion of the solution, dilute 
hydrochloric acid was added followed by  barium chloride solution.blue solution formed
………………………………………….…………
 
[1]
……………………………………………….……  [2]
………………………………………..…………...
 
[2]
…………………………………………………….
 
[2]
tests on solid V
 d
 Appearance of solid 
V black solid
 e  Hydrogen peroxide was added to solid 
V in a test-tube.  
A glowing splint was inserted into the tube.rapid effervescence
splint relit
 f
 i
  Compare the reactivity of solid 
S and solid V   
with hydrogen peroxide.
 [
1]
  
ii
 Identify the gas given of
f in test e.
 
[1]   
 g
 What conclusions can you draw about solid 
V?
 [
2]
 Cambridge IGCSE Chemistry 0620 Paper 6 Q5 June 2009Cambridge ig CSe exam que Stion S
308

--- Page 310 ---
12 A sample of solid C was analysed. C is a mixture of two 
salts, D and E. Solid D is insoluble lead carbonate and  
solid E is water-soluble. 
 The tests on 
C, and some of the observations are in the 
following tables. Complete the observations that would  go in the tables.
 Solid 
C was added to a boiling tube containing distilled 
water. The tube was shaken to mix the contents.  The contents of the boiling tube were filtered.tests observations
 a
 Describe the appearance of 
C. pale green solid
 b
  Using a spatula, place a little of 
C in a hard glass test-tube. 
Inside the top of the tube suspend a piece of damp indicator paper. Heat C gently until gas comes out of the tube. paper turns bluepH 8 to 11
 c
  Using a spatula, place a little of 
C in a test-tube.  
Add about 2 cm3 of dilute nitric acid and test the gas. c  .............................................  [3]
tests on the filtrate observations
 e
 Divide the filtrate into three test tubes.
  
i
  T
o the first portion add dilute hydrochloric acid and  
about 1 cm3 of aqueous barium nitrate. white precipitate
  
ii
  T
o the second portion of solution add excess aqueous 
ammonia. green precipitate
  
iii
  T
o the third portion of solution, add an equal volume  
of aqueous sodium hydroxide. Warm the mixture gently.  Test the gas with indicator paper.paper turns blue pH 8 to 11
f
 Name the gas given of
f in c.
 
[1]
g
 Name the gas given of
f in e iii.
 [
1]
h
 What conclusions can you draw about salt 
E?
 
[4]
 Cambridge IGCSE Chemistry 0620 Paper 6 Q5 June 2007tests on the residue in the filter paper observations
 
d
 Place the funnel in a test-tube. Pour dilute nitric acid 
 
     onto the residue contained in the funnel.
    
  Add 2 cm3 of potassium iodide to the solution collected  
 in the tube. d
 
.............................................
 [2]Your Cambridge igCSe Chemi StrY  exam
309

--- Page 311 ---
Refe Rence
310
Glossary
A
acetylene  a gas (formula C2H2) used as a 
fuel, for example in the oxy-acetylene torch
acid rain
 rain that is acidic because gases
 
such as sulfur dioxide are dissolved in it 
(from burning fossil fuels)
acidic solution
 has a pH less than 7; an
 
acidic solution contains H
 1 ions
acid fermentation
 the process in which
 
bacteria convert ethanol to ethanoic acidaddition reaction
 where a molecule adds
 
onto an alkene, and the C 5  C double bond 
of the alkene changes to a single bondaddition polymerisation
 where small
 
molecules join to form a very large molecule, 
by adding on at double bonds
alcohols
 a family of organic compounds,
 
similar to the alkanes but with the OH 
functional group; ethanol is an example 
alkali
 a soluble base; for example sodium
 
hydroxidealkali metals
 the Group I elements of the
 
Periodic Tablealkaline earth metals
 the Group II
 
elements of the Periodic Tablealkaline solution
 has a pH above 7;
 
alkaline solutions contain OH
 2 ions
alkanes
 a family of saturated hydrocarbons
 
with the general formula CnH2n 1 2; 
‘saturated’ means they have only single C–C 
bonds
alkenes
 a family of unsaturated hydro-
carbons with the general formula CnH2n ; 
their molecules contain a carbon 5 carbon 
double bondallotropes
 dif
ferent forms of an element; 
diamond and graphite are allotropes of 
carbon 
alloy
 a mixture where at least one other
 
substance is added to a metal, to improve its 
properties; the other substance is often a metal too (but not always)
amphoteric
 can be both acidic and basic in
 
its reactions; for example aluminium oxide 
is an amphoteric oxide
anion
 another name for a negative ion
anode
 the positive electrode of a cell
aquifer
 underground rocks holding a large
 
volume of water; it can be pumped out to 
give a water supply
atmosphere
 the layer of gases around the 
Earth; here at the Earth’
s surface, we call it 
airatoms
 elements are made up of atoms, 
which contain protons, neutrons, and 
electrons
A
vogadro constant
 the number of particles
 
in one mole of an element or compound; it 
is 6.02 3  1023B
back reaction  the reaction in which the  
product breaks down again, in a reversible 
reaction 
bacteria
 tiny organisms, some of which can
 
cause disease; others break down dead plant 
and animal material
balanced equation
 a chemical equation in
 
which the number of each type of atom is 
the same on both sides of the arrow
base
 a metal oxide or hydroxide; a base will
 
neutralise an acid, to form a salt and waterbattery
 a portable electrical cell; for
 
example a torch batterybiodegradable
 will decay naturally in the
 
soil, with the help of bacteriabiopolymer
 a polymer made by bacteria
blast furnace
 the chemical plant in which
 
iron is extracted from its ore, iron(III) oxide boiling
 the change from a liquid to a gas,
 
which takes place at the boiling pointboiling point
 the temperature at which a
 
substance boilsbond energy
 the energy needed to break a
 
bond, or released when the bond is formed; 
it is given in kilojoules (kJ) per mole
bonding
 how the atoms are held together
 
in an element or compound; there are three 
types of bonds: ionic, covalent, and metallic
brittle
 breaks up easily when struck
brine
 the industrial name for a
 
concentrated solution of sodium chloride in 
water; it can be made by dissolving rock salt
burette
 a piece of laboratory equipment for
 
delivering a measured volume of liquidburning
 an exothermic chemical reaction
 
in which the reactant combines with oxygen 
to form an oxide; also called combustion
C
carbon cycle  the way carbon moves non-
stop between the atmosphere, living things,
 
the land, and the ocean; it moves in the form of carbon dioxide
carboxylic acids
 a family of organic acids,
 
which have the COOH functional 
group;
 ethanoic acid is an example
cast iron
 iron from the blast furnace that is
 
run into molds to harden; it contains a high % of carbon, which makes it brittle
catalyst
 a substance that speeds up a
 
chemical reaction, without itself being used 
up in the process
catalytic converter
 a device in a car
 
exhaust, in which catalysts are used to 
convert harmful gases to harmless ones 
catalytic cracking
 where large molecules
 
of hydrocarbons are split up into smaller 
ones, with the help of a catalystcathode
 the negative electrode of an
 
electrolysis cell
cation
 another name for a positive ion
cell (biological)
 the building blocks for
 
animals and plantscell (electrical)
 a device that converts
 
chemical energy to electrical energycement
 a substance used in building, made
 
from limestone and clayceramic
 a hard, ureactive material that can
 
withstand high temperatures, made by 
baking clay in a kiln; ceramics are non-conductors
chalk
 a rock made of calcium carbonate
change of state
 a change in the physical
 
state of a substance – for example from solid 
to liquid, or liquid to gas
chemical change
 a change in which a new
 
chemical substance formschemical equation
 uses chemical symbols 
to describe a chemical reaction in a short 
way
chemical reaction
 a process in which
 
chemical change takes placechromatogram
 the paper showing the
 
separated coloured substances, after paper  
chromatography has been carried outclimate change
 how climates around the
 
Earth are changing, because of the rise in 
average air temperatures
coagulant
 a substance that will make small
 
particles stick together; coagulants are used 
in cleaning up water, ready for piping to homes
coke
 a form of carbon made by heating
 
coalcombination
  where two or more
 
substances react to form a single substancecombustible
 can catch fire and burn very
 
easilycombustion
 another name for burning
compound fertiliser
 it provides
 
nitrogen, potassium, and phosphorus 
for plants
compound ion
 an ion containing more
 
than one element; for example the nitrate ion NO
3–
compound  a substance in which two or 
more elements are chemically combined
 
concentration
 tells you how much of 
one 
substance is dissolved in another; usually given as grams or moles per dm
3
condensation  the physical change in which  
a gas turns into a liquid on cooling
condensation polymerisation
 where
 
molecules join to make very large molecules, 
by eliminating small molecules (such as water molecules)

--- Page 312 ---
311Refe Rence
condenser  a piece of laboratory equipment  
used to cool a gas rapidly, and turn it into a 
liquid
conductor
 a substance that allows heat or
 
electricity to pass through it easilyContact process
 the industrial process for
 
making sulfuric acidcorrosion
 where a substance is attacked by
 
air or water, from the surface inwards; the 
corrosion of iron is called rusting
covalent bond
 the chemical bond formed
 
when two atoms share electrons covalent compound
 a compound made of
 
atoms joined by covalent bondscracking
 reactions in which long-chain
 
hydrocarbon molecules are broken down to 
shorter, more useful molecules
cross-linking
 the chemical bonds between
 
the long-chain molecules in some polymers, 
that hold the chains together 
crude oil
 the fossil fuel formed over millions
 
of years from the remains of tiny sea plants 
and animals; it is also called petroleum 
crystallisation
 the process in which
 
crystals form, as a saturated solution cools
D
decomposition reaction  where a substance  
breaks down to give two or more productsdenature
 to destroy the structure of an
 
enzyme by heat, or a change in pHdegradeable
 will break down naturally 
(for example through the action of 
bacteria)
density
 tells you how ‘heavy’ something is;
 
the density of a substance is its mass per 
unit volume; for water it is 1 g
 / cm3
diatomic  a substance is called diatomic if  
its molecules contain two atoms joined by a covalent bond
diffusion
 the process in which particles
 
mix by colliding randomly with each other, 
and bouncing off in all directions
displacement reaction
 a reaction in
 
which a more reactive element takes the 
place of a less reactive one, in a compound
dissolving
 the process in which a soluble
 
substance forms a solutiondistillation
 separating a liquid from a 
mixture by boiling it of
f, then condensing it 
double bond
 a covalent bond in which two
 
atoms share two pairs of electronsductile
 can be drawn out into a wire; for
 
example copper is ductiledynamic equilibrium
 where forward and
 
back reactions take place at the same rate, 
so there is no overall change
E
electrodes  the conductors used to carry  
current into and out of an electrolyte; they could be graphite rods, for example 
electrolysis
 the process of breaking down
 
a compound by passing a current through itelectrolyte
 the liquid through which the
 
current is passed, in electrolysis; the current 
is carried by ions in the electrolyte
electron distribution
 how the electrons in
 
an atom are arranged in shells (2 1  8 1 …)
electron shells
 the dif
ferent energy levels 
which electrons occupy, around the nucleuselectronic configuration
 another term for   
electron distributionelectrons
 the particles with a charge of 1–
 
and almost no mass, in an atomelectroplating
 coating one metal with
 
another, using electrolysiselement
 a substance that cannot be split
 
into anything simpler, in a chemical reactionempirical
 found by experiment
 
empirical formula
 shows the simplest 
ratio in which the atoms in a compound 
are combined
endothermic
  takes in energy from the
 
surroundingsenzymes
 proteins made by living cells, that
 
act as biological catalystsequation
 it uses symbols to describe a
 
chemical reaction (but a word equation uses 
just words)
equilibrium
 the state where the forward
 
and back reactions are taking place at the 
same rate, in a reversible reaction; so there is no overall change
ester
 a compound formed when an alcohol
 
reacts with a carboxylic acid; esters often smell of fruit or flowers
evaporation
 the physical change where a
 
liquid turns to a gas at a temperature below 
its boiling point
exothermic
  gives out energy
 
extract
 to remove a metal from its ore
 
F
fermentation  the process in which the  
enzymes in yeast break down sugars, to 
form ethanol and carbon dioxide
fertilisers
 substances added to soil to help
 
crops grow wellfiltering
 separating solids from liquids by
 
pouring the mixture through filter paper filtrate
 the liquid obtained from filtration
 
(after the solid has been removed)flammable
 burns easily
flue gas desulfurisation
 the removal of
 
sulfur dioxide from the waste gases at power 
stations, to stop it getting into the atmosphere
formula
 uses symbols and numbers to tell
 
you what elements are in a compound, and 
the ratio in which they are combined 
forward reaction
 the reaction in which
 
the product is made, in a reversible reactionfossil fuels
 petroleum (crude oil), natural
 
gas, and coal; they are called the fossil fuels 
because they were formed from the remains of living things, millions of years agofractional distillation
 a method used to  
separate two or more liquids that have
 
different boiling points
fractions
 the dif
ferent groups of 
compounds that a mixture is separated into, 
by fractional distillation; fractions are 
collected one by one
freezing
 the change from liquid to solid,
 
that occurs at the freezing point (5  melting 
point)fuel
 a substance we use to provide energy;
 
most fuels are burned to release their energy 
(but nuclear fuels are not) 
fuel cell
 a cell in which a chemical reaction
 
provides electricity (to light homes and so 
on)
functional group
 the part of the molecule
 
of an organic compound, that largely 
dictates how it reacts; for example the OH group in molecules of the alcohol family 
G
galvanising  coating iron with zinc, to  
prevent the iron from rusting
giant structure
 where a very large number
 
of atoms or ions are held in a lattice by 
strong bonds; metals, diamond and ionic solids such as sodium chloride are all giant structures
global warming
 the rise in average
 
temperatures taking place around the world; 
many scientists believe that carbon dioxide (from burning fossil fuels) is the main cause
greenhouse gas
 a gas in the atmosphere
 
that traps heat, preventing its escape into 
space; carbon dioxide and methane are examples
group
 a column of the Periodic T
able; 
elements in a group have similar properties
H
Haber process  the process for making  
ammonia from nitrogen and hydrogen, in 
industry
half-equation
 an equation that shows the
 
reaction taking place at an electrodehalogens
 the Group VII elements of the
 
Periodic Tableheating curve
 a graph showing how the
 
temperature of a substance changes on 
heating, while it goes from solid to liquid to gas
homologous series
 a family of organic
 
compounds, that share the same general 
formula and have similar properties
hydrated
 has water molecules built into its
 
crystal structure; for example copper(II) 
sulfate: CuSO4.5H2O
hydrocarbon
 a compound containing 
only 
carbon and hydrogen
hydrogenation
 adding hydrogen
 
hydrogen fuel cell
 it uses the reaction 
between hydrogen (from a tank), and 
oxygen (from the air), to give an electric current

--- Page 313 ---
312Refe Rence
hydrolysis  the breaking down of   
a compound by reaction with water
hypothesis
 a statement you can test by 
doing an experiment and taking 
measurements
I
incomplete combustion  the burning of  
fuels in a limited supply of oxygen; it gives carbon monoxide instead of carbon dioxide
indicator
 a chemical that shows by its
 
colour whether a substance is acidic or 
alkaline
inert
 does not react (except under extreme
 
conditions)inert electrode
 is not changed during
 
electrolysis; all it does is conduct the currentin excess
 more than is needed for a
 
reaction; some will be left at the endinsoluble
 does not dissolve in a solvent
insulator
 a poor conductor of heat or
 
electricityintermolecular forces
 forces between
 
moleculesion
 a charged atom or group of atoms
 
formed by the gain or loss of electronsionic bond
 the bond formed between ions
 
of opposite chargeionic compound
 a compound made up of
 
ions, joined by ionic bondsionic equation
 shows only the ions that
 
actually take part in a reaction, and ignores 
any other ions present; the other ions are called spectator ions
isomers
 compounds that have the same 
formula, but a dif
ferent arrangement of 
atoms isotopes
 atoms of the same element, that
 
have a different numbers of neutrons
L
lattice  a regular arrangement of particles
lime
 the common name for calcium oxide
limewater
 a solution of the slightly soluble
 
compound calcium hydroxide, which is used 
to test for carbon dioxide
locating agent
 used to show up colourless
 
substances, in chromatography; it reacts 
with them to give coloured substances
M
macromolecule  a very large molecule; for  
example a molecule in a polymer
malleable
 can be bent or hammered into
 
shapemass spectrometer
 an instrument used to
 
find the masses of atoms and moleculesmelting point
 the temperature at which a
 
solid substance meltsmelting
 the physical change from a solid to
 
a liquidmetal
 an element that shows metallic 
properties (for example conducts 
electricity
, and forms positive ions)metallic bond
 the bond that holds the
 
atoms together in a metal 
metalloid
 an element that has properties of
 
both a metal and a non-metalmicrobe
 a microscopic (very tiny) living
 
organism, such as a bacterium or virusminerals
 compounds that occur naturally in
 
the Earth; rocks contain different mineralsmixture
 contains two or more substances
 
that are not chemically combined molar solution
 contains one mole of a
 
substance in 1 dm3 (1 litre) of water
mole
 the amount of a substance that
 
contains the same number of elementary 
units as the number of carbon atoms in 12g of carbon-12; you obtain it by weighing out the A
r or Mr of the substance, in grams
molecular
  made up of molecules
molecule
 a unit of two or more atoms held
 
together by covalent bonds
monatomic
 made up of single atoms; for
 
example neon is a monatomic elementmonomers
 small molecules that join
 
together to form polymers
N
native  describes a metal that is found in the  
Earth as the element
negative electrode
 another name for the
 
cathode, in an electrolysis cellnegative ion
 an ion with a negative charge
neutral (electrical)
 has no charge
neutral (oxide)
 is neither acidic nor basic;  
carbon monoxide is a neutral oxideneutral (solutions)
 neither acidic nor
 
alkaline; neutral solutions have a pH of 7neutralisation
 the chemical reaction
 
between an acid and a base or a carbonate, 
giving a salt and water
neutron
 a particle with no charge and a mass
 
of 1 unit, found in the nucleus of an atom nitrogenous fertiliser
 it provides nitrogen  
for plants, in the form of nitrate ions or
 
ammonium ionsnoble gases
 the Group 0 elements of the
 
Periodic Table; they are called ‘noble’ 
because they are so unreactive
non-metal
 an element that does not show
 
metallic properties: the non-metals lie to the 
right of the zig-zag line in the Periodic Table, (except for hydrogen, which sits alone)
non-renewable resource
 a resource such
 
as petroleum that we are using up, and 
which will run out one day 
non-toxic
 not harmful health
nucleon number
 the number of protons
 
plus neutrons in an atom of an element nuclear fuel
 contains radioisotopes such
 
as uranium-235; these are forced to break 
down, giving out energy 
nucleus
 the centre part of the atom, made
 
up of protons and neutronsO
ore rock containing a metal, or metal 
compounds, from which the metal is 
extracted
organic chemistry
 the study of organic
 
compounds (there are millions of them!)organic compound
 a compound containing
 
carbon, and usually hydrogen; petroleum is a 
mixture of many organic compounds
oxidation
 a chemical reaction in which a
 
substance gains oxygen, or loses electronsoxidation state
 every atom in a formula
 
can be given a number that describes its 
oxidation state; for example in NaCl, the oxidation states are +I for sodium, and – I for chlorine 
oxide
 a compound formed between oxygen
 
and an other element oxidising agent
 a substance that brings
 
about the oxidation of another substanceozone
 a gas with the formula O3
ozone layer  the layer of ozone up in the  
atmosphere, which protects us from harmful 
UV radiation from the sun
P
paper chromatography  a way to separate  
the substances in a mixture, using a solvent and special paper; the substances separate because they travel over the paper at different speeds
percentage composition
 it tells you which
 
elements are in a compound, and what % of 
each is present by mass
period
 a horizontal row of the Periodic
 
Table; its number tells you how many 
electron shells there are
periodicity
 the pattern of repeating  
properties that shows up when elements are
 
arranged in order of proton number; you 
can see it in the groups in the Periodic Table
Periodic Table
 the table showing the
 
elements in order of increasing proton 
number; similar elements are arranged in columns called groups
petroleum
 a fossil fuel formed over millions
 
of years from the remains of tiny sea plants 
and animals; it is also called crude oil
pH scale
 a scale that tells you how acidic or
 
alkaline a solution is; it is numbered 0 to 14photochemical reaction
 a reaction that
 
depends on light energy; photosynthesis is 
an example
photodegradeable
 can be broken down by
 
light photosynthesis
 the 
process in which plants 
convert carbon dioxide and water to glucose 
and oxygen
physical change
 a change in which no new
 
chemical substance forms; melting and  
boiling are physical changesphysical properties
 properties such as
 
density and melting point (that are not 
about chemical behaviour)

--- Page 314 ---
313Refe Rence
pipette  a piece of laboratory equipment  
used to deliver a known volume of liquid, 
accurately 
plastics
 a term used for synthetic polymers
 
(made in factories, rather than in nature)pollutant
 a substance that causes harm if it
 
gets into the air or waterpollution
 when harmful substances are
 
released into the environmentpolymer
 a compound containing very large
 
molecules, formed by polymerisationpolymerisation
 a chemical reaction in
 
which many small molecules join to form 
very large molecules; the product is called a polymer
positive ion
 an ion with a positive charge
precipitate
 an insoluble chemical
 
produced during a chemical reactionprecipitation reaction
 a reaction in which
 
a precipitate formsproduct
 a chemical made in a chemical
 
reactionprotein
 a polymer made up of many
 
different amino acid units joined togetherproton number
 the number of protons in
 
the atoms of an element; it is sometimes 
called the atomic number
proton
 a particle with a charge of 1+ and a
 
mass of 1 unit, found in the nucleus of an 
atom
pure
 there is only one substance in it
Q
quicklime  another name for calcium oxide
R
radioactive isotopes (radioisotopes)   
unstable atoms that break down, giving out
 
radiationrandom motion
 the zig-zag path a particle
 
follows as it collides with other particles and 
bounces away again
rate of reaction
 how fast a reaction is
reactant
 a starting chemical for a chemical
 
reactionreactive
 tends to react easily
reactivity
 how readily a substance reacts
reactivity series
 the metals listed in order
 
of their reactivityrecycling
 reusing resources such as scrap
 
metal, glass, paper and plasticsredox reaction
 any reaction in which  
electrons are transferred; one substance is
 
oxidised (it loses electrons) and another is 
reduced (it gains electrons)
reducing agent
 a substance which brings
 
about the reduction of another substancereduction
 when a substance loses oxygen,  
or gains electronsrefining (petroleum)
 the process of
 
separating petroleum (crude oil) into groups 
of compounds with molecules fairly close in size; it is carried out by fractional distillationrefining (metals)
 the process of purifying
 
a metal; copper is refined using electrolysis
relative atomic mass (
Ar) the average  
mass of the atoms of an element, relative to the mass of an atom of carbon-12
relative formula mass (M
r) the mass of  
one formula unit of an ionic compound; you 
find it by adding together the relative atomic masses of the atoms in the formula 
relative molecular mass
 the mass of a
 
molecule; you find it by adding the relative 
atomic masses of the atoms in it
renewable resource
 a resource that will
 
not run out; for example water, air, sunlightresidue
 the solid you obtain when you
 
separate a solid from a liquid by filteringrespiration
 the reaction between glucose
 
and oxygen that takes place in the cells of all 
living things (including you) to provide energy
reversible reaction
 a reaction that can go
 
both ways: a product can form, then break 
down again; the symbol  is used to show a 
reversible reaction 
rusting
 the name given to the corrosion of
 
iron; oxygen and water attack the iron, and 
rust forms 
S
sacrificial protection  allowing one metal  
to corrode, in order to protect another metal
salt
 an ionic compound formed when an 
acid reacts with a metal, a base, or a 
carbonate 
saturated compound
 an organic
 
compound in which all the bonds between 
carbon atoms are single covalent bonds
saturated solution
 no more of the solute
 
will dissolve in it, at that temperaturesingle bond
 the bond formed when two
 
atoms share just one pair of electronsslaked lime
 another name for calcium
 
hydroxidesolubility
 the amount of solute that will
 
dissolve in 100 grams of a solvent, at a given 
temperature
soluble
 will dissolve in a solvent
solute
 the substance you dissolve in the
 
solvent, to make a solutionsolution
 a mixture obtained when a solute
 
is dissolved in a solventsolvent
 the liquid in which a solute is
 
dissolved, to make a solutionsonorous
 makes a ringing noise when 
struckspectator ions
 ions that are present in a
 
reaction mixture, but do not actually take 
part in the reaction 
stable
  unreactive
state symbols
 these are added to an
 
equation to show the physical states of the 
reactants and products (g  5 gas, l  5 liquid,  
s 5 solid, aq 5 aqueous) structural formula
 the formula of a
 
compound displayed to show the bonds between the atoms as lines; we often show organic compounds this way
T
thermal decomposition  the breaking  
down of a compound by heating it
thermite process
 the redox reaction
 
between iron oxide and aluminium, which 
produces molten iron
titration
 a laboratory technique for finding
 
the exact volume of an acid solution that will 
react with a given volume of alkaline solution, or vice versa
toxic
 poisonous
transition elements
 the elements in the
 
wide middle block of the Periodic Table; they 
are all metals and include iron, tin, copper, and gold 
trend
 a gradual change; the groups within
 
the Periodic Table show trends in their 
properties; for example as you go down Group I, reactivity increases
triple bond
 the bond formed when two
 
atoms share three pairs of electrons; a 
nitrogen molecule has a triple bond
U
universal indicator  a paper or liquid you  
can use to find the pH of a solution; it changes colour across the whole range of pH
unreactive
 does not react easily
unsaturated compound
 an organic
 
compound with at least one double bond 
between carbon atoms
V
valency  a number that tells you how many  
electrons an atom gains, loses or shares, in forming a compound
valency electrons
 the electrons in the
 
outer shell of an atomvariable valency
 an element shows
 
variable valency if its atoms can lose 
different numbers of electrons, in forming compounds; for example copper forms Cu+ and Cu
2 1 ions
viscosity
 a measure of how runny a liquid
 
is; the more runny it is, the lower its viscosity
viscous
 thick and sticky
 
volatile
 evaporates easily
, to form a vapour
W
water of crystallisation  water molecules  
built into the crystal structure of a 
compound; for example in copper(II) sulfate, CuSO
4.5H2O
weak acids
 acids in which only some of the
 
molecules are dissociated, to form H
 1 ions; 
ethanoic acid is a weak acid
Y
yield  the actual amount of a product  
obtained in a reaction; it is often given as a % of the theoretical yield (which you can work out from the equation)

--- Page 315 ---
Refe Rence
314
1II I IIIGroupThe Periodic Table of the Elements
IV VV I VII 0
H
Hydrogen4
He
Helium
1 2
7
Li
Lithium
39
Be
Beryllium
411
B
Boron
512
C
Carbon
614
N
Nitrogen
716
O
Oxygen
819
F
Fluorine
920
Ne
Neon
10
23
Na
Sodium
1124
Mg
Magnesium
1227
Aluminium
1328
Si
Silicon
1431
P
Phosphorus
1532
S
Sulfur
1635.5
Chlorine
1740
Ar
Argon
18
39
K
Potassium
1940
Ca
Calcium
2045
Sc
Scandium
2148
Ti
Titanium
2251
V
Vanadium
2352
Cr
Chromium
2455
Mn
Manganese
2556
Fe
Iron
2659
Co
Cobalt
2759
Ni
Nickel
2864
Cu
Copper
2965
Zn
Zinc
3070
Ga
Gallium
3173
Ge
Germanium
3275
As
Arsenic
3379
Se
Selenium
3480
Br
Bromine
3584
Kr
Krypton
36
85
Rb
Rubidium
3788
Sr
Strontium
3889
Y
Yttrium
3991
Zr
Zirconium
4093
Nb
Niobium
4196
Mo
Molybdenum
42Tc
Technetium
43101
Ru
Ruthenium
44103
Rh
Rhodium
45106
Pd
Palladium
46108
Ag
Silver
47112
Cd
Cadmium
48115
In
Indium
49119
Sn
Tin
50122
Sb
Antimony
51128
Te
Tellurium
52127
I
Iodine
53131
Xe
Xenon
54
133
Cs
Caesium
55137
Ba
Barium
56139
La
Lanthanum
*178
Hf
Hafnium
72181
Ta
Tantalum
73184
W
Tungsten
74186
Re
Rhenium
75190
Os
Osmium
76192
Ir
Iridium
77195
Pt
Platinum
78197
Au
Gold
79201
Hg
Mercury
80204
Thallium
81207
Pb
Lead
82209
Bi
Bismuth
83Po
Polonium
84At
Astatine
85Rn
Radon
86
Fr
Francium
87226
Ra
Radium
88227
Ac
Actinium
89 †
*58–71 Lanthanoid series
†90–103 Actinoid series140
Ce
Cerium
58141
Pr
Praseodymium
59144
Nd
Neodymium
60Pm
Promethium
61150
Sm
Samarium
62152
Eu
Europium
63157
Gd
Gadolinium
64159
Tb
Terbium
65163
Dy
Dysprosium
66165
Ho
Holmium
67167
Er
Erbium
68169
Tm
Thulium
69173
Yb
Ytterbium
70175
Lu
Lutetium
71
232
Th
Thorium
90Pa
Protactinium
91238
U
Uranium
92Np
Neptunium
93Pu
Plutonium
94Am
Americium
95Cm
Curium
96Bk
Berkelium
97Cf
Californium
98Es
Einsteinium
99Fm
Fermium
100Md
Mendelevium
101No
Nobelium
102Lr
Lawrencium
10357A C
T
The symbols and proton numbers of the elements
Element Symbol Proton 
numberElement Symbol Proton 
numberElement Symbol Proton 
numberElement Symbol Proton 
number
actinium Ac 89 calcium Ca 20 francium Fr 87 lawrencium Lw 103
aluminium Al 13 californium Cf 98 gadolinium Gd 64 lead Pb 82
americium Am 95 carbon C 6 gallium Ga 31 lithium Li 3
antimony Sb 51 cerium Ce 58 germanium Ge 32 lutetium Lu 71
argon Ar 18 chlorine Cl 17 gold Au 79 magnesium Mg 12
arsenic As 33 chromium Cr 24 hafnium Hf 72 manganese Mn 25
astatine At 85 cobalt Co 27 helium He 2 mendelevium Md 101
barium Ba 56 copper Cu 29 holmium Ho 67 mercury Hg 80
berkelium Bk 97 curium Cm 96 hydrogen H 1 molybdenum Mo 42
beryllium Be 4 dysprosium Dy 66 indium In 49 neodymium Nd 60
bismuth Bi 83 einsteinium Es 99 iodine I 53 neon Ne 10
boron B 5 erbium Er 68 iridium Ir 77 neptunium Np 93
bromine Br 35 europium Eu 63 iron Fe 26 nickel Ni 28
cadmium Cd 48 fermium Fm 100 krypton Kr 36 niobium Nb 41
caesium Cs 55 fluorine F 9 lanthanum La 57 nitrogen N 7

--- Page 316 ---
315Refe Rence
Relative atomic masses (Ar) 
for calculations
Element Symbol    Ar
aluminium Al   27
bromine Br   80
calcium Ca   40
carbon C   12
chlorine Cl   35.5
copper Cu   64
fluorine F  19
helium He    4
hydrogen H    1
iodine I 127
iron Fe   56
lead Pb 207
lithium Li     7
magnesium Mg   24
manganese Mn   55
neon Ne   20
nitrogen N   14
oxygen O   16
phosphorus P   31
potassium K   39
silver Ag 108
sodium Na   23
sulfur S   32
zinc Zn   65Key
a = relative atomic mass
X = atomic symbol
b = proton numbera
X
b
Element Symbol Proton 
numberElement Symbol Proton 
numberElement Symbol Proton 
number
nobelium No 102 rhodium Rh 45 thallium Tl 81
osmium Os 76 rubidium Rb 37 thorium Th 90
oxygen O 8 ruthenium Ru 44 thulium Tm 69
palladium Pd 46 samarium Sm 62 tin Sn 50
phosphorus P 15 scandium Sc 21 titanium Ti 22
platinum Pt 78 selenium Se 34 tungsten W 74
plutonium Pu 94 silicon Si 14 uranium U 92
polonium Po 84 silver Ag 47 vanadium V 23
potassium K 19 sodium Na 11 xenon Xe 54
praseodymium Pr 59 strontium Sr 38 ytterbium Yb 70
promethium Pm 61 sulfur S 16 yttrium Y 39
protactinium Pa 91 tantalum Ta 73 zinc Zn 30
radium Ra 88 technetium Tc 43 zirconium Zr 40
radon Rn 86 tellurium Te 52
rhenium Re 75 terbium Tb 651II I IIIGroupThe Periodic Table of the Elements
IV VV I VII 0
H
Hydrogen4
He
Helium
1 2
7
Li
Lithium
39
Be
Beryllium
411
B
Boron
512
C
Carbon
614
N
Nitrogen
716
O
Oxygen
819
F
Fluorine
920
Ne
Neon
10
23
Na
Sodium
1124
Mg
Magnesium
1227
Aluminium
1328
Si
Silicon
1431
P
Phosphorus
1532
S
Sulfur
1635.5
Chlorine
1740
Ar
Argon
18
39
K
Potassium
1940
Ca
Calcium
2045
Sc
Scandium
2148
Ti
Titanium
2251
V
Vanadium
2352
Cr
Chromium
2455
Mn
Manganese
2556
Fe
Iron
2659
Co
Cobalt
2759
Ni
Nickel
2864
Cu
Copper
2965
Zn
Zinc
3070
Ga
Gallium
3173
Ge
Germanium
3275
As
Arsenic
3379
Se
Selenium
3480
Br
Bromine
3584
Kr
Krypton
36
85
Rb
Rubidium
3788
Sr
Strontium
3889
Y
Yttrium
3991
Zr
Zirconium
4093
Nb
Niobium
4196
Mo
Molybdenum
42Tc
Technetium
43101
Ru
Ruthenium
44103
Rh
Rhodium
45106
Pd
Palladium
46108
Ag
Silver
47112
Cd
Cadmium
48115
In
Indium
49119
Sn
Tin
50122
Sb
Antimony
51128
Te
Tellurium
52127
I
Iodine
53131
Xe
Xenon
54
133
Cs
Caesium
55137
Ba
Barium
56139
La
Lanthanum
*178
Hf
Hafnium
72181
Ta
Tantalum
73184
W
Tungsten
74186
Re
Rhenium
75190
Os
Osmium
76192
Ir
Iridium
77195
Pt
Platinum
78197
Au
Gold
79201
Hg
Mercury
80204
Thallium
81207
Pb
Lead
82209
Bi
Bismuth
83Po
Polonium
84At
Astatine
85Rn
Radon
86
Fr
Francium
87226
Ra
Radium
88227
Ac
Actinium
89 †
*58–71 Lanthanoid series
†90–103 Actinoid series140
Ce
Cerium
58141
Pr
Praseodymium
59144
Nd
Neodymium
60Pm
Promethium
61150
Sm
Samarium
62152
Eu
Europium
63157
Gd
Gadolinium
64159
Tb
Terbium
65163
Dy
Dysprosium
66165
Ho
Holmium
67167
Er
Erbium
68169
Tm
Thulium
69173
Yb
Ytterbium
70175
Lu
Lutetium
71
232
Th
Thorium
90Pa
Protactinium
91238
U
Uranium
92Np
Neptunium
93Pu
Plutonium
94Am
Americium
95Cm
Curium
96Bk
Berkelium
97Cf
Californium
98Es
Einsteinium
99Fm
Fermium
100Md
Mendelevium
101No
Nobelium
102Lr
Lawrencium
10357A C
T

--- Page 317 ---
Index
316
Index
Where several page numbers 
are given and one is bold, look that one up first.
A
acetone
 
17
acetylene
 
213
acidic oxides
 157
acidity
 
150
and pH number
 149
acid rain
 214,
 225
acids
 
148–155
and pH
 149
as proton donors
 154, 
155
carboxylic
 
258–259
reactions of
 152–153
strong and weak 148, 150
addition 
polymerisation
 
264–265
air
 
210–213
alanine
 
274
alcoholic drinks
 256
alcohols
 
256–257
algae
 
229
alkali metals
 166, 
168–169
alkaline earth metals
 166, 
182
alkalis
 
148–152
alkanes
 250, 251, 
252–253
alkenes
 
254–255
allotropes (of carbon)
 61, 
234
alloys
 203, 204
 
alumina (aluminium 
oxide)
 200, 201
aluminium 
alloys of
 203
apparent unreactivity
 191
corrosion in
 191, 201
extraction of
 200–201
in the Earth’
s crust
 194
in the reactivity series
 188
ore
 195, 197, 
200
properties of
 201
uses of
 200, 
202
aluminium ions, test for
 286
aluminium oxide
 195, 
 
197, 201
amide linkage
 266,
 274
amino acids
 24, 
274,  
276, 277
ammonia
 
225–227
as an alkali
 148, 151
bonding in
 57
Haber process for
 226
in making fertilisers
 229
laboratory 
preparation
 
225
manufacture
 
126–127, 
226–227
test for
 285
ammonium compounds
chloride
 
225
nitrate
 225, 228ammonium ion, test for  285
amphoteric oxides
 157
anode
 
104
aqueous solution
 17
Ar 70
argon
 37, 48, 
172–173
artificial elements
 30, 
167
artificial fertilisers
 228
atmosphere
 
210
atoms
 
30, 32
Avogadro constant
 76
A
vogadro’s Law
 80
aquifer
 
218
Bback reaction
 124
bacteria
 35, 141, 142, 218
baking soda
 52, 153
balancing equations
 68–69
barium sulfate
 160, 287
bases
 
152–153
alkalis (soluble 
bases)
 
148–152 
and acids
 152–153
as proton acceptors
 155
reactions of
 152
basic oxides
 156
batteries
 
122–123
bauxite (aluminium 
ore)
 
195, 200
biological catalysts
 140
biological detergents
 141
bio-polymers
 
271
bitumen
 
247
blast furnace
 198–199
bleaching
by chlorine
 285
by hydrogen peroxide
 87
by sulfur dioxide
  231
boiling (change of state)
 11
boiling points
 9
and purity
 19
for ionic compounds
 59
for molecular 
substances
 54, 59 
bond breaking and 
making
 
116
bond energies
 116
bonding
between ions
 50–51
 in giant covalent 
structures
 
60–61
in metals
 62
in molecules
 54–57
brass
 
203
breathalyser test
 99
brine
 
108
electrolysis of
 108–109
bromide ion, test for
 287
bronze
 
206
burning of fuels
 114, 
118–119
energy from
 118, 119butane
 
252
butanoic acid
 258
but-1-ene
 
254
Ccalamine lotion 
 153
calcium
reaction with oxygen
 93
reactivity of
 184, 
188
calcium compounds
carbonate
 236, 241
hydroxide
 16, 148, 241
oxide
 93, 199, 205, 
 
240, 241
calcium ions, test for
 286
calculations from 
equations
 
78–79 
cancer treatment by 
radioisotopes
 
35
carbohydrates
 
272–273
complex
 
273 
carbon
 
allotropes of
 61
as a reducing agent
 196
in steel
 204, 
205
isotopes of
 34
reactivity compared to 
metals
 
186, 188
carbon-12
 34,
 70, 76
carbonates
 
236
carbon cycle
 234–235
carbon dioxide
 236
and global warming
  
238–239
and the carbon cycle
  
234
 
–235
bonding in
 57
in photosynthesis
 235
properties of
 236
carbonic acid
 148, 236
carbon monoxide
 236
as a reducing agent
 196
carboxyl functional 
group
 
258
  
carboxylic acids
 258–259
car exhausts
 215
cast iron
 199
catalysts
 
140–141
biological (enzymes)
 140,
 
142–143
in car exhausts
 215
 
transition elements 
as
 141,
 175 
cathode
 
104
cell (producing 
electricity)
 
120
cellulose
 
263
cement
 
241
chain length
and boiling point
 251
and homologous 
series
 
251
in polythene
 264changes of state
 8–11
charcoal
 
234
charge (for blast 
furnace)
 
198
charge (on sub-atomic 
particles)
 
32
chemical change
 46, 
47
chemical equations
 68–69
chemical properties
 42
chemical reaction
 47
chlorine
as a member of Group 
VII
 170
 
–171
bonding in
 55
from electrolysis of 
brine
 
108
reaction with sodium
  
48–50
uses of
 109
chlorine water
 171
chloromethane
 
253
chlorophyll
 
144
chromatogram
 
23
chromatography (paper)
  
23–25
chromium
 175, 204
use in plating
 111
citric acid
 148
climate change
 239
coal
 
214, 244
cobalt chloride
 124
coke
 
198
collision theory (for reaction 
rate) 138–139
combustion
 93, 114
competition among 
metals
 
186–187
compound ions
 53
compounds
 
46
and mixtures
 46
covalent
 56–57,
 58–59 
forming
 
48
ionic
 50–51,
 58–59
names and formulae
  
66–67
percentage composition 
of
 
73
compression of gases
 12
concentration of a 
solution
 
82–83 
finding by titration
  
162–163
concrete
 
241
condensation
 
11
condensation 
polymerisation
 
263, 
266–267
condenser
 
22
conductivity of metals
 42, 
63, 
103
conductors
 
102–103
Contact process
 232

--- Page 318 ---
317Index
copper  174
bonding in
 62
in reactivity series
 188
refining of
 110 
uses of
 202
copper ion, test for
 286
copper(II) oxide
 92 
copper(II) sulfate
 158 
electrolysis of 
solution
 
110
in testing for water
 124 
corrosion 
of aluminium
 191
of iron
 216–217
covalent bond
 54–55
covalent compounds
 56–57
covalent giant structures
  
60–61 
cracking of 
hydrocarbons
 
248–249
crude oil (petroleum)
  
244–245
crystallisation
 
20
cysteine
 
274
D
decay (radioactivity)
 34
denature (enzymes)
 141
density
 
182
detergents (biological)
 141
diamond
 
60
diaphragm cell
 108
diatomic
 
54
dichloromethane
 
253
diesel (fraction from 
petroleum)
 
247
diffusion
 7, 13
displacement reactions
 171, 
185, 187
dissolving
 
16
distillation
 
22
distilled water
 22
double bonds
 55
 
in alkenes
 254
ductile (of metals)
 63, 
182
dynamic equilibrium
 125
EEarth’
s crust
 194 
electricity
 
102
electrode
 
104
electrolysis
 
102–111
in extraction of 
aluminium
 
201
in extraction of 
metals
 
196–197
of brine
 108
of copper(II) sulfate 
solution 110
of molten compounds
 104
of solutions
 105
electrolyte
 
103
electron distribution
 36–37
electrons
 32,
 36
electron shells
 36
electron transfer (in redox 
reactions) 94electroplating  111
elements
 
30–31
empirical formula
 84–85
endothermic reactions
 115
energy changes during 
reactions
 
114–115
energy from fuels
 118–119
energy level diagram
 114, 115
enzymes
 140,
 141, 142–143
equations
 
68–69
calculations using
 78–79
half-equations
 
94
ionic equations
 95,
 154
equilibrium (in reversible 
reactions)
 
125
ester linkage
 259,
 267, 275
esters
 
259
ethane
 
252
ethanoates
 
259
ethanoic acid
 258,
 259
ethanol
 256,
 257
ethene
 254,
 255
evaporation
 
11
exothermic reactions
 114
explosions
 
137
extraction of metals
 196–197
Ffats
 
275
fatty acids
 275
fermentation
 
142, 256
fertilisers
 
228–229
filtering
 
20
filtrate
 
20
flue gas desulfurisation
 241
fluoride (in water 
supply)
 
219
formulae
 46,
 66
empirical
 
84–85
molecular
 
86–87
of compounds
 66–67
of ionic compounds
 52–53
formula mass
 71
forward reaction
 124
fossil fuels
 244
fountain experiment
 225
fractional distillation
 22 
fractions in fractional 
distillation
 
246
fractions from refining 
petroleum
 
247
freezing
 
8
freezing point
 8
fuel cell
 121
fuel oil
 247
fuels
 
118–119
functional group
 251,
 254, 
256, 258
Ggalena (ore)
 230
galvanising
 191,
 217
gas chromatography
 26
gases
 8,
 10, 12–13
and Avogadro’s Law
 80
compression of
 12
dif
fusion in
 13ef fect of temperature 
on
 
12
pressure in
 12
gasoline (petrol)
 247
giant covalent structures
  
60–61
global warming
 238–239
glucose
 
272, 273
glycerol
 
275
glycine
 
274
gold
 
195
graphite
 
61
greenhouse gases
 238
groundwater
 
218
groups in Periodic Table
  
31, 
166
Group 0 (noble 
gases)
 
172–173
Group I (alkali 
metals)
 
168–169
Group II (alkaline earth 
metals)
 
166 
Group VII (halogens)
  
170–171
gypsum
 
241
HHaber process
 226–227
haemoglobin
 236,
 274
half-equations
 
94
halides
 
170
halogens
 
170–171
heating curve
 9
helium
 37, 172, 173
hematite (iron ore)
 198
homologous series
 251
hydrocarbons
 251,
 252, 254
hydrochloric acid
 148,
 150
electrolysis of dilute
  105
electrolysis of 
concentrated 105
hydrogen
 
224
as a fuel
 119, 
121
bonding in
 54
displacement of
 185
from electrolysis of 
brine
 
108
in Periodic Table
 167
reactivity relative to 
metals
 
188 
test for
 285
uses of
 109
hydrogen chloride
 116, 150
bonding in
 56
hydrogen ions, in acids
  
150
, 154
hydrogen sulfide
 67, 230
hydrolysis
in digestion
 276
in the lab
 277
hydroxide ions (and 
alkalinity)
 
151
hydroxides
 152,
 184, 189
Iimpurities
 
18–17
incomplete combustion
 252indicators  149
indigestion
 
155
insoluble salts
 160–161
insulators
 
102
iodide ion, test for
 287
iodine
 
170
displacement of
 171
ionic bonds
 50–51
ionic compounds
 50, 51
and electrolysis
 104
formulae of
 52
names of
 52–53
properties of
 59
ions
 49,
 52, 53
compound ions
 53
mass of
 71
iron
 174,
 175
alloys of
 204–205
corrosion (rusting) 
of
 
216–217
extraction of
 198–199
in the Earth’
s crust
 194
in reactivity series
 188
ore
 
198
properties of
 174, 175, 204
iron ions, test for
 286
iron(III) oxide
 156, 
198
iron sulfide
 46
isomers
 253,
 255
isotopes
 34,
 70
Kkerosene
 
247
kilojoule (kJ)
 114
kinetic particle theory
 11
krypton
 172, 173
Llattice
 50,
 58
lead
and extraction 
methods
 
196
‘lead’ in pencils
 61
reactivity of
 185, 186, 188
lead bromide, electrolysis 
of
 104, 106
Le Chatelier’
s principle
 126
light (and photochemical 
reactions) 144–145, 253 
lime
 153, 240
limestone
 
153, 240–241
limewater
 241,
 285
liquids
 
8–11
lithium
 
123, 168, 169
litmus
 
148
locating agent
 25
lubricating fraction
 247
Mmacromolecules
 
262, 
272–275 
magnesium
 51, 132, 185
magnesium chloride
 51, 
132, 185
magnesium oxide
 51, 85, 186
magnesium sulfate (Epsom
 
salts)
 
52 

--- Page 319 ---
Index
318malleable (of metals)  63, 174
manganese (and variable 
valency)
 
96
manganese(IV) oxide   
122, 140
mass of atoms, molecules
 
and ions
 70–71
melting
 8, 9, 
10
melting points
 8,
 9
and purity
 19
of ionic compounds
 59
of metals
 62
of molecular covalent
  
compounds
 
59
of giant covalent 
structures
 
60
metallic bonds
 62
metalloids
 
176
metal oxides
 156, 157
metals
 42, 43, 
182–183
bonding in
 62–63
compared with non-
metals
 
42–43
extraction from ores   
196–197
in Earth’
s crust
 194
in Periodic T
able
 182
in reactivity series
 188
ores
 
195
properties of
 182–183
reactions with
 
oxygen
 
156
reactivity of
 184–188
stability of
 
compounds
 
189
transition elements   
174–175
uses of 175, 202–203
metal salts
 152, 158–161
methane
 
252
as fuel (natural gas) 244
as greenhouse gas
 238
bonding in
 56
methanoic acid
 252, 
258
methyl orange indicator 149mild steel
 204
mining of metal ores
 195
mixtures
 
16
compared with 
compounds
 
46
mobile phase (in 
chromatography)
 
26
molar volume of a gas
 80
molar solution
 82
mole
 
76
molecular formulae   
46, 66
molecular substances   
54–57,
 59
molecules
 
54
masses of
 71
monomer
 262,
 264, 266
monosaccharides
 
273
Mr 71Nnames for compounds
 52–
53, 66–67
naphtha
 247,
 249
natural gas
 118, 
244
natural polymers
 263
neon
 
48, 172–173
neutralisation reactions
 153, 
154–155
neutral liquids (and pH)
 149
neutral oxides
 157
neutrons
 32,
 33
nickel
 
174
ninhydrin
 
25
nitrate ion, test for
 287
nitrates
 152,
 160, 189 
nitric acid
 148 
nitrogen
 
224
bonding in
 55
for plants
 228
production in 
industry
 
212
uses
 
213
nitrogen oxides as 
pollutants
 
214
noble gases
 172–173
electron distribution in
 48
in Periodic T
able
 166
uses of
 173
non-conductor
 
102
non-metals
 42, 43 
compared with metals
 42
in Periodic T
able
 31 
reactions with oxygen
 157 
non-renewable resource
 245
nuclear fuels
 119
nucleon number
 33
nucleus of atoms
 32
nylon
 266,
 269
Ooil (petroleum)
 244–245
and pollution
 214
refining of
 246–247
sulfur extraction from
 230
ores
 195,
 196
organic chemistry
 237
organic compounds
 237,
 250
oxidation
 
92
and electron transfer
 94–95
oxidation state
 96–97
oxides
 
156–157
oxidising agents
 98–99
oxy-acetylene torch
 213
oxygen
 
in air
 210–211
bonding in the 
molecule
 
55
bonding in ionic 
compounds
 
51
reaction with metals and 
non-metals
 
156–157
separation from air
 212
uses  213oxygen mask
 213
oxygen tent
 213
oxygen, test for
 285
Ppainting (against rust)
 217
palmitic acid
 275
paper chromatography
 23, 
24
 
–25
paraffin (kerosene)
 247
particles in matter
 6–7, 
10–11
evidence for 6, 7
pentane
 
250
percentage composition of 
compounds
 
73
percentage purity
 73, 
88–89
percentage yield
 88
Periodic T
able
 166–167,
 
178–179
petrol (gasoline)
 87, 
247
petroleum (crude oil)
  
244–245
and pollution
 214
refining of
 246–247
sulfur extraction from
 230
pH scale
 149
phenolphthalein
 
149
phosphorus 
combustion in oxygen
 157
impurity in steel-
making
 
205
for plants
 228
phosphorus pentoxide
 157
photographic film
 145,
 161
photosynthesis
 144,
 234 
physical change
 47
physical properties
 42
phytoplankton
 
235
plastics
 
262, 268–269
and pollution
 270–271
made by 
polymerisation
 
264–267
platinum 
in catalytic converters
 215
in the Earth’
s crust
 194
for inert electrodes
 104
pollution 
in air
 214–215
by plastic
 270–271
polyamide
 
266 
poly(chloroethene) or 
PVC
 
265
polyester
 
267
polymerisation
 255, 263, 
264–267
polymers
 262–263,
 264–267
poly(propene)
 
265
polysaccharide
 
273
polystyrene
 
265
polythene, or 
poly(ethene)
 
262, 264
and chain lengths
 264
and pollution  270changing properties 
of
 
268
uses of
 269
potassium (as Group I 
metal)
 
168–169
reactivity
 184, 185, 
188
potassium compounds 
bromide, and 
displacement
 
171
bromide, and 
electrolysis
 
105
bromide, and 
photography
 
161
dichromate(VI), as 
oxidising agent
 99
iodide, and 
displacement
 
171
iodide, as reducing 
agent
 
99
hydroxide
 148,
 151, 184
manganate(VII) and 
diffusion
 
7
manganate(VII), as 
oxidising agent
 98
potassium for plants
 228 
power stations
 118,
 119, 
231, 241
 
precipitation
 
160–161
pressure in gases
 12
propane
 
250, 252
propane-1,2,3-triol 
(glycerol)
 
275
propanoic acid
 258
propanone
 
17
propene
 
254
proteins
 
263, 272
from polymerisation of 
amino acids
 274 
hydrolysis of
 276, 277
proton donors and 
acceptors
 
155
proton number
 32,
 33
protons 32 purity
 
18
and melting and boiling 
points
 
19
percentage
 73,
 88, 89 
PVC (polychloroethene)
  
265,
 269 
Qquartz
 
60
quicklime
 240,
 241
Rradiation
 34,
 35
radioactivity
 
34–35
radioisotopes
 
34
random motion of 
particles
 
6
rate of reaction
 131,
 
130–145
and catalysts
 140–141
and concentration  134,  138

--- Page 320 ---
Index
319and photochemical 
reactions
 
140–141
and surface area
 136–137,
 
139
and temperature
 135,
 139
measuring
 131,
 132–137
reactants
 
68
reactions, equations for
  
68–69
energy changes in
 114–115
reversible
 
124–125
reactivity
of Group I metals
 168–169
of Group VII 
(halogens)
 
170–171
of Group 0 (noble 
gases)
 
172
of metals
 184–187
reactivity series of 
metals
 
188
recycling iron and steel
 205
redox reactions
 92–97
and electron transfer
  
94–95
and oxidation state
 96–97
reducing agent
 98,
 99
reduction
 
92–95
in metal extraction
 196
refining petroleum (oil)
 22, 
246–247
relative atomic mass, 
Ar 70
relative formula mass, 
Mr 71
relative molecular mass, 
Mr 71
residue from filtration
 20
respiration
 
234, 235
reversible reactions
 124–125
Rf value  25  
rock salt
 195
rotary kiln
 240
rubber (vulcanizing of)
 230
rusting and its prevention 
216–217
S
sacrificial protection
 191,
 
217
salt (sodium chloride)
 50, 
58
salts
 
152
making in laboratory
  
158–161
solubility of some
 160sand
 
60
saturated compounds 
(alkanes)
 
252
saturated solutions
 17
scientific method
 280
semi-conductors
 
177
separation methods
 20–25
shells (electron)
 36
silicon dioxide (silica)
 60,
 
61, 66 
silver (a transition 
element)
 
174
and electroplating
 111
in film photography
 145
reactivity of
 184, 185, 
188
silver bromide
 145,
 161
single bond
 54
slag
 199, 205
slaked lime
 153, 
241
smoke particles
 6
soap
 
277
sodium
as alkali metal
 168–169
extraction of
 196
properties of
 168–169
sodium chloride
 48
bonding in
 48, 50
electrolysis of molten 
 
compound
 
105
electrolysis of 
solutions
 105,
 106–108
structure and 
properties
 58, 59
sodium hydroxide
 184
as alkali
 148, 151
from electrolysis of 
brine
 
108
uses of  109
soil acidity
 153,
 240
solidifying
 
11
solids
 8,
 11
solutions
 
16–17
concentration of
 82–83
electrolysis of
 105,
 
106–107
solvents
 16,
 17
sonorous
 
182
stability of metal 
compounds
 
189
stainless steel
 204,
 205
standard solution
 162starch
 263, 272 
from polymerisation of 
glucose
 
273 
hydrolysis of
 276, 277
state symbols
 68
steel
 
175 
electroplating of
 111
galvanising of
 191
manufacture of
 204–205
recycling of
 205
styrene
 
265
substitution reaction
 253
sulfates
 
152
solubility of
 160
sulfur
 
30, 230
sulfur dioxide
 157, 
231
and flue gas 
desulfurisation
 
241
as pollutant
  214, 
231
sulfur trioxide
 232
sulfuric acid
 233
manufacture of
 232
properties
  233
sulfurous acid
 231
surface area of solid 
reactant 
 
 and rates of 
reaction
 136–137,
 139
and risk of explosions
 137
symbols for elements
 30
synthetic polymers
 262
TT
eflon
 265,
 269
Terylene
 267,
 269
tests in the laboratory
for anions and 
cations  286–287
for gases
 285
for unsaturation
 255
for water
 124
tetrachloromethane
 
253
thermal decomposition
 189,
 
240, 248
thermite process
 190
tin (for plating steel)
 111
titanium 108, 206, 207, 264 titrations
 
159, 162–163
tracers
 
35
transition elements
 167, 
174–175
as catalysts
 141, 175
trichloromethane
 
253U
universal indicator  149
unsaturated (organic 
compounds)
 
254
test for unsaturation
 255
unsaturated fats
 275
Vvalency
 66,
 67, 176
valency electrons
 166
variables (in experiments)
 280
vinegar
 
258
vinyl chloride
 265
viscosity
 247, 251
volatile liquids
 17,
 246
voltage (of cells)
 190
vulcanizing
 
230
Wwater
 
224
as solvent
 16, 17
bonding in
 56 
changes of state for
 8
formula of
 46
heating curve for
 9
reaction with metals
 184
tests for
 124
uses of
 218
water supply
 218–219
water vapour
 8
Xxenon
 172, 173
Yyeast
 
142, 256
yield
 
88
in making ammonia
 126, 
227
Zzinc
 174,
 182
extraction of
 197
reactivity of
 184–186, 
188
uses of
 202
zinc blende (ore)
 197
zinc chloride
 185
zinc oxide
 157
zinc sulfate
 131

--- Page 321 ---
Acknowledgments:
The publisher would like to thank the following for their kind permission to reproduce 
photographs:
P6t: RMG; P6bl: Shutterstock; P6br: Dan Gair Photographic/Photolibrary; P7: Philippe 
Plailly/Science Photo Library; P9t: Bowater Peter/Photo Researchers,Inc/Photo Library; P9b: Tepic/Shutterstock; P10t: Istockphoto; P10m: Istockphoto; P10b: Istockphoto; P12t: Jose AS Reyes/Shutterstock; P12m: Prestige; P12b: Cebas/Istockphoto; P13t: Ekaterina Pokrovskaga/Shutterstock; P13b: Bobby Yip/Reuters; P16t: OUP; P16b: OUP; P17: Rich Legg/Istockphoto; P18bl: Mariusz S.Jurgielewicz/Shutterstock; P18br: Sean Locke/Istockphoto; P19:OUP; P20: Maria Toutoudaki/Istockphoto; P21t: Wijnand Loven/Istockphoto; P21m: OUP; P21b: OUP; P22: Robert Francis/Photolibrary; P24: Yuri Arcurs/Shutterstock; P26: Loren Rodgers/Shutterstock; P27: Mara Radeva/Istockphoto; P27b: Phil Augustavo/Istockphoto; P30tl: OUP; P30tm: Shutterstock; P30tr: OUP; P30m: The Art Gallery Collection/Alamy; P30b: AK Photo/Shutterstock; P31: Hulton Archive/Getty Images; P32: Iofoto/Shutterstock; P34: Science Photo Library/Photolibrary; P35t: Hank Morgan/Science Photo Library; P35bl: JTB Photo/Photolibrary; P35br: Roca/Shutterstock; P36: Baron/Hulton Archive/Getty Images; P37: OUP; P38t: Georgios Kollidas/Shutterstock; P38m: Stephen Kiers/Shutterstock; P38b: Science Photo Library; P39t: Sheila Terry/Science Photo Library; P39b: Philippe Plailly/Science Photo Library; P40t: Science Photo Library; P40b: Mark Yuill/Shutterstock; P41bl: CERN; P41br: A. Barrington Brown/Science Photo Library; P42: Omar Farooque; P43tl: Alan Crawford/Istockphoto; P43tr: Omar Farooque; P43b: Kushch Dmitry/Shutterstock; P46bl: Journal of Chemical Education Softward, Chemistry Comes Alive! Vol 3 © 1999, Division of Chemical Education; P46bm: Journal of Chemical Education Softward, Chemistry Comes Alive! Vol 3 © 1999, Division of Chemical Education; P46br: Journal of Chemical Education Softward, Chemistry Comes Alive! Vol 3 © 1999, Division of Chemical Education; P47: Tlorna/Shutterstock; P48tl: Photocritical/Shutterstock; P48tr: Xtrekx/Shutterstock; P50: OUP; P52: Katarzyna Krawiec/Shutterstock; P54: Paul Ingram; P55t: OUP; P55m: OUP; P55b: OUP; P56t: OUP; P56m: OUP; P56b: OUP; P57(t-b): OUP; Paul Ingram; OUP; Paul Ingram; P58tl: OUP; P58tr: Daniel Taeger/Shutterstock; P58bl: Stefan Glebowski/Shutterstock; P58br: Dmitry Galanternik/Istockphoto; P59t: Maximilian Stock Ltd/Science Photo Library; P59b: Stefan Redel/Shutterstock; P60t: Dmitry Kalinovsky/Shutterstock; P60b: OUP; P61t: OUP; P61b: RMG; P62t: Andrew Lambert/University of Liverpool; P62bl: Andrew Lambert/University of Liverpool; P62br: Andrew Lambert/University of Liverpool; P63t: Crafts Council; P63b: Omar Farooque; P66: ImageState/Alamy; P67: Paul Rapson/Science Photo Library; P68: Johnson Space Center/NASA; P69t: Yoav Levy/Photolibrary; P69b: OUP; P72t: OUP; P72b: French School,(20th century)/Musee de la Ville de Paris,Musee Carnavalet,Paris, France/Archives Charmet / The Bridgeman Art Library; P73: Iain McGillivray/Shutterstock; P76bl: OUP; P76bm: OUP; P76br: OUP; P78: Journal of Chemical Education Softward, Chemistyr Comes Alive!Vol3©1999, Division of Chemical Education; P79t: OUP; P79b: OUP; P80: OUP; P81: Thomas J.Casadevall/U.S. Geological Survey; P84: OUP; P85: Ron Kloberdanz/Shutterstock; P86: Geoff Tompkinson/Science Photo Library/Photolibrary; P87t: Aj Photo/Hop Americain/Science Photo Library/Photolibrary; P87b: David H. Lewis/Istockphoto; P88t: Thor Jorgen Udvang/Shutterstock; P88b: Chepko Danil Vitalevich/Shutterstock; P89: Tina Lorien/Istockphoto; Page 92t: OUP; P92bl: Jordache/Shutterstock; P92br: Claudio Arnese/Istockphoto; P93t: Olga Utlyakova/Shutterstock; P93b: MorePixels/Istockphoto; P95: Charles D. Winters/Science Photo Library; P96t: OUP; P96b: OUP; P97t: OUP; P97b: OUP; P98: OUP; P99t: OUP; P99m: Jim Varney/Science Photo Library/Photolibrary; P99b: OUP; P102t: OUP; P102b: Muellek Josef/Shutterstock; P103l: OUP; P103m: OUP; P103r: OUP; P108t: Georg Gerster/Photo Researchers; P108b: OUP; P109l: Andrzej Drozdza/Istockphoto; P109r: Mona Makela/Shutterstock; P111l: Ullstein Ecopix/Still Pictures; P111r: OUP; P114l: OUP; P114m: OUP; P114r: OUP; P115l: OUP; P115m: Sciencephotos/Alamy; P115r: OUP; P116: Charles D. Winters/Science Photo Library; P118l: Jiri Jura/Shutterstock; P118m: Sagasan/Shutterstock; P118r: Chris G. Parkhurst/Shutterstock; P119t: Carolina K. Smith, M.D./Shutterstock; P119b: Postnikova Kristina/Shutterstock; P121: American Honda Motor Co., Inc.; P122t: Jon Schutte/Istockphoto; P122b: Hywit Dimyadi/Shutterstock; P123: Stepanov/Shutterstock, Design/Shutterstock, Agita Leimane/Shutterstock, Konstantin Chagin/Shutterstock; P124l: OUP; P124r: OUP; P125: Peter Albrektsen/Shutterstock; P130tl: OUP; P130tm: Jorgen Schytte/Photolibrary; P130tr: Charles Schug/Istockphoto; P130bl: Best Images/Shutterstock; P130bm: Valeria/Shutterstock; P130br: Seraficus/Istockphoto; P131l: OUP; P131m: OUP; P131r: OUP; P132: OUP; P134: OUP; 135t: Filipe Varela/Istockphoto; 135b: Christine Glade/Istockphoto; P136l: OUP; P136r: OUP; P137t: Tyler Stableford/Getty Images; P137b: STR New/Reuters; P141t: James L. Amos/Corbis; P141b: Gabi Moisa/Shutterstock; P142t: Dmitry Knorre/Istockphoto; P142m: Grasko/Shutterstock; P142bl: Volker Steger/Science Photo Library; P142br: OUP; P143t: Shannon Matteson/Shutterstock; P143m: Tomas Bercic/Istockphoto; P143b: NOAA Photo Library; P144t: Power And Syred/Science Photo Library; P144b: Nigel Cattlin/FLPA; P148tl: OUP; P148tm: OUP; P148tr: OUP; P148m: OUP; P148b: OUP; P150t: Dino O./Shutterstock; P150b: Rob Cruse/Istockphoto; P151: RMG; P152t: OUP; P152m: OUP; P152b: OUP; P153t: INSADCO Photography/Alamy; P153b: Ivanschenko Roman/Shutterstock; P154: Andrew Lambert Photography/Science Photo Library; P155: RMG; P157t: OUP; P157b: Jodi Jacobson/Istockphoto; P158: Canis Maior/Shutterstock; P159: Laurence Gough/Istockphoto; P160: OUP; 161t: Brenda Carson/Shutterstock; 161bl: Marianne Rosenstiehl/Corbis; 161br: Niall McDiarmid/Alamy; P163tl: Laurence Gough/Shutterstock; P163tr: Andrew Lambert Photography/Science Photo Library; P163br: Nell Redmond/Istockphoto; P167t: Photodisc/OUP; P167b: Omar Farooque; P168: OUP; P169: OUP; P170: David H. Lewis/Istockphoto; P171: Andrew Lambert Photography /Science Photo Library; P173tl: Amy Nichole Harris/Shutterstock; P173tr: OUP; P173br: One clear vision/Istockphoto; P174tl: OUP; P174tm: OUP; P174tr: OUP; P174br: Collection of ‘Bizarre’ series ceramics (ceramic), Cliff, Clarice (1899-1972)/Private Collection/Photo © Bonhams, London, UK/The Bridgeman Art Library; P175: Mike Clarke/Istockphoto; P177t: Maria Skaldina/Shutterstock; P177b: John Keith/Shutterstock; P178t: March Cattle/Shutterstock; P178b: Skyhawk/Shutterstock; P179tl: Mary Evans Picture Library/Photolibrary; P179tr: A. Zschau, GSI; P179mr: Dmitry Yashkin/Shutterstock; P179br: Graca Victoria/Istockphoto; P183tl: Chris Schmidt/Istockphoto; P183tr: Pgiam/Istockphoto; P183bl: OUP; P183bm: OUP; P183br: Elianet Ortiz/Istockphoto; P185: OUP; P188t: Martin Anderson/Shutterstock; P188b: Sergey Peterman/Shutterstock; P189: Dean Conger/Corbis; P190: The Metropolitan Council; P191t: Leslie Garland Picture Library/Alamy; P191b: George Peters/Istockphoto; P194t: STS-114 Crew/NASA; P194m: Thorsten Rust/Shutterstock; P194b: Zoran Karapancev/Shutterstock; P195tl: OUP; P195tm: OUP; P195tr: OUP; P195br: Lee Prince/Shutterstock; P196br: Paul Fleet/Shutterstock; P197t: Maximilian Stock  Ltd/Science Photo Library; P197b: Tamara Kulikova/Istockphoto; P198t: Crown Copyright/Health & Safety Laboratory/Science Photo Library; P198b: SergioZ/Shutterstock; P199: David Reilly/Shutterstock; P200tl: Andreas Reh/Istockphoto; P200tm: Iuoman/Istockphoto; P200tr: Robert Weber/Istockphoto; P200bl: OUP; P200bm: OUP; P200br: Colin Young/Istockphoto; P201t: Maximilian Stock Ltd/Science Photo Library; P201b: Nolimitpictures/Istockphoto; P202l: Christian Darkin/Science Photo Library/Photolibrary; P202m: RMG; P202r: Vasily Smirnov/Shutterstock; P203: Garloon/Shutterstock; P204tl: OUP; P204tm: Anton Foltin/Istockphoto; P204tr: Svetlana Lukienko/Shutterstock; P204bl: Miguel Malo/Istockphoto; P204br: Fancy/Photolibrary; P205l: Rihardzz/Shutterstock; P205r: Oleg-F/Shutterstock; P207tl: Erhan Dayi/Shutterstock; P207tr: Jasmin Awad/Istockphoto; P207mr: Eoghan McNally/Shutterstock; P207br: Georgios Kollidas/Istockphoto; P210bl: NASA; P210br: Elisei Shafer/Shutterstock; P211t: Sebastian Kaulitzki/Istockphoto; P211b Grzegorz Choinski/Istockphoto; P212: Pasquale Sorrentino/Science Photo Library; P213tl: Medical-on-Line/Alamy; P213tr: Jordache/Shutterstock; P213b: Jonathan Feinstein/Shutterstock; P214t: OUP; P214b: Ian Bracegirdle/Shutterstock; P215: Barnaby Chambers/Shutterstock; 216tl: Shutterstock; 216tr: Piotr Tomicki/Shutterstock; 216b: Kolbjorn Hoseth Larssen/Istockphoto; P217tl: Shutterstock; P217tr: Robert Buchanan Taylor/Shutterstock; P217b: Ricardo Azoury/Istockphoto; P218t: OUP; P218: Kris Jacobs/Shutterstock; P220: NASA; P221: NASA; P224: Mohammed Yousuf/The Hindu; P225: OUP; P226: ICI; P228tl: P Wei/Istockphoto; P228tm: Shutterstock; P228tr: Adam Hart-Davis/Science Photo Library; P228m: Jean-Michel Groult/Photolibrary: P228b: Ron Giling/Lineair/Still Pictures; P229t: Yara International ASA; P229b: P229: Heike Kampe/Istockphoto; P230m: OUP; P230b: OUP; P231t: OUP; P231bl: Kuttelvaserova/Shutterstock; P231br: Alessandro Minguzzi/Istockphoto; P232: Manamana/Shutterstock; P233t: Martyn F. Chillmaid/Science Photo Library; P233b: JinYoung Lee/Shutterstock; P234: Jurie Maree/Shutterstock; P235t: Sportgraphic/Shutterstock; P235b: Elwynn1130/Istockphoto; P236t: Jam-design.cz/Shutterstock; P236b: Don Hammond/Design Pics/Corbis; P237t: Scott Lomenzo/Shutterstock; 237bl: Ranplett/Istockphoto; P237br: Ghaint/Shutterstock; P238: Javarman/Shutterstock; P239t: Marc van Vuren/Shutterstock; P239b: Pauline S Mills/Istockphoto; P240: Christopher Jones/Shutterstock; P241t: Emmanuel R Lacoste/Shutterstock; P241b: Ruslan Gilmanshin/Istockphoto; P244tl: Paul Rapson/Science Photo Library; P244tm: Oleksandr Kalinichenko/Shutterstock; P244tl: Hywit Dimyadi/Istockphoto; P245tl: Lya Cattel/Istockphoto: P245tm: OUP; P245tr: OUP; P245b: Eyeidea/Istockphoto; P247: Mike Clarke/Istockphoto; P248t: Zybr/Shutterstock; P248b: Christian Lagerek/Shutterstock; P249t: Tony Tremblay/Istockphoto; P249b: MirAgareb/Istockphoto; P250: Rtimages/Istockphoto; P252: Sciencephotos/Alamy; P253: Mark Evans/Istockphoto; P245: NFSphoto/Shutterstock; P255: Andre Blais/Shutterstock; P256t: Originalpunkt/Shutterstock; P256b: Tish1/Shutterstock; P257t: Celso Pupo/Shutterstock; P257bl: Carroteater/Istockphoto; P257br: Tomas Bercic/Istockphoto; P258: Gordana Sermek/Shutterstock; P259: OUP; P262tl: OUP; P262tm: OUP; P262tr: Gelpi/Shutterstock; P262b: RMG; P263tl: Highviews/Shutterstock; P263tm:Istockphoto; P263tr: Gabi Moisa/Shutterstock; P263b: Chris Hellyar/Istockphoto; P264t: Miguel Malo/Istockphoto; P264b: Andriscam/Shutterstock; P265: Istockphoto; P266t: Charles D.Winters/Science Photo Library; P266b: Dreamstime; P267t: OUP; P267b: Shutterstock; P268t: P268t: Tomas Bercic/iStockphoto; P268b: OUP; P269t:  Alexey U/Shutterstock; P269bl: Christina Richards/Istockphoto; P269br: Uyen Le/Istockphoto; P270t: Izabela Habur/Istockphoto; P270bl: Andreas Weiss/Istockphoto; P270br: Andy Davies/Science Photo Library; P271t: Maxine Adcock/Photolibrary; P271b: Peter Yates/Science Photo Library; P273t: Michał Krakowiak/Istockphoto; P273b: Tania A/Shutterstock; P275: Heldur Netocny/Photolibrary; P276t: Anita Patterson Peppers/Big Stock; P276m: Martin Turzak/Shutterstock; P276b: Shout/Rex Features; P277: Alandj/Istockphoto.   
320

--- Page 322 ---
Complete Chemistry for Cambridge IGCSE® provides clear and comprehensive 
support for the Cambridge International Examinations syllabus for Chemistry. This 
bestselling resource now includes a CD with past paper questions and revision checklists to fully develop understanding. 
Oxford and Cambridge are world leaders in international education. Our combined 
expertise and knowledge shape Oxford’s resource packages for Cambridge IGCSE. You can rely on:
● Fully comprehensive, endorsed student textbooks, mapped to the Cambridge syllabus, equipping students to tackle complex theory 
● Customisable digital Teacher Kits endorsed by Cambridge and loaded with digital material to support effective delivery 
● Thorough revision support focused on building exam confidence and supporting achievementAuthors
RoseMarie GallagherPaul Ingram
Step-by-step approach simplifies complex ideas
Application boxes link learning to the real worldComplete
Chemistry
for Cambridge IGCSE®
Second Edition
RoseMarie Gallagher 
and Paul Ingram are a well-known author team with a wealth of teaching, examining and authoring experience. 
Also available:
978 0 19 915266 7
 978 0 19 913881 4
1How to get in contact:
web
 www
.oxfordsecondary.co.uk/cambridge
email
 
schools.enquiries.uk@oup.com
tel
 +44 (0)
1536 452620
 fax
 +44 (0)
1865 313472

