
--- Page 1 ---
Complete
Chemistry
for Cambridge IGCSE®
Second Edition
RoseMarie Gallagher
Paul Ingram
Oxford and Cambridge  
leading education together


--- Page 2 ---
Complete
Chemistry
for Cambridge IGCSE®
Second Edition
RoseMarie Gallagher
Paul Ingram
Oxford and Cambridge  
leading education together

--- Page 3 ---

Great Clarendon Street, Oxford OX2 6DP
Oxford University Press is a department of the University of Oxford.  
It furthers the University’s objective of excellence in research, scholarship,  and education by publishing worldwide in
Oxford  New York
Auckland   Cape Town   Dar es Salaam   Hong Kong   Karachi  
Kuala Lumpur   Madrid   Melbourne   Mexico City   Nairobi  New Delhi   Shanghai   Taipei   Toronto
With offices in
Argentina   Austria   Brazil   Chile   Czech Republic   France   Greece  
Guatemala   Hungary   Italy   Japan   Poland   Portugal   Singapore  South Korea   Switzerland   Thailand   Turkey   Ukraine   Vietnam
© RoseMarie Gallagher and Paul Ingram 2011
The moral rights of the authors have been asserted
Database right Oxford University Press (maker)
First published as Complete Chemistry (ISBN 9780199147991)
This edition first published in 2007
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a 
retrieval system, or transmitted, in any form or by any means, without the prior permission in writing of Oxford University Press, or as expressly permitted by law, or under terms agreed with the appropriate reprographics rights organization. Enquiries concerning reproduction outside the scope of the above should be sent to the Rights Department, Oxford University Press, at the address above.
You must not circulate this book in any other binding or cover and you must 
impose this same condition on any acquirer
British Library Cataloguing in Publication Data
Data available
ISBN 978-0-19-913878-4
10 9 8 7 6
Printed in Malaysia by Vivar Printing Sdn. Bhd.
Paper used in the production of this book is a natural, recyclable product made 
from wood grown in sustainable forests. The manufacturing process conforms to the environmental regulations of the country of origin.
Acknowledgments 
®IGCSE is the registered trademark of Cambridge International Examinations.
The publisher would like to thank Cambridge International Examinations for their 
kind permission to reproduce past paper questions.
Cambridge International Examinations bears no responsibility for the example 
answers to questions taken from its past question papers which are contained in this publication. 
The acknowledgments for the photographs are on page 320.

--- Page 4 ---
iii
Introduction
If you are taking IGCSE chemistry, using the Cambridge International 
Examinations syllabus 0620, then this book is for you. It covers the syllabus fully, and has been endorsed by the exam board. 
Finding your way around the book
The contents list on the next page shows how the book is organised.  Take a look. Note the extra material at the back of the book too: for example the questions from past exam papers, and the glossary. 
Finding your way around the chapters
Each chapter is divided into two-page units. Some colour coding is used within the units, to help you use them properly. Look at these notes:
Core curriculum
If you are following the Core curriculum, you can ignore any material with a red line beside it.
Extra material
Pages of this colour contain extra material for some topics.  We hope that you will find it interesting – but it is not needed for the exam.Extended curriculum
For this, you need all the material on the white pages, including the material marked with a red line.
Chapter checkups
There is a revision checklist  at the end of each chapter,  and also a set of exam-level questions about the chapter,  on a coloured background.
Making the most of the book and CD
We want you to understand chemistry, and do well in your exams.  This book, and the CD, can help you. So make the most of them!
Work through the units
 The two-page units will help you build up 
 
your knowledge and understanding of the chemistry on your syllabus. Use the glossary
 If you come across a chemical term that you do not 
understand, try the glossary
. You can also use the glossary to test yourself. 
Answer the questions
 It is a great way to get to grips with a topic. 
 
This book has lots of questions: at the end of each unit and each chapter, 
and questions from past exam papers at the end of the book.
Answers to the numerical questions are given at the back of the book. 
Your teacher can provide the answers for all the others.
Use the CD
 The CD has an interactive test for each chapter
, advice on 
revision, sample exam papers, and more. And finally, enjoy!
 Chemistry is an important and exciting subject. 
W
e hope this book will help you to enjoy it, and succeed in your course. 
RoseMarie Gallagher  
Paul Ingram

--- Page 5 ---
Contents
1.1 Everyth ing is made of particles  6
1.2 Sol ids, liquids, and gases  8
1.3 The part icles in solids, liquids, and gases  10
1.4 A cl oser look at gases  12
  Checkup on Chapter 1
 14
2.1 Mixtur es, solutions, and solvents  16
2.2 Pur e substances and impurities  18
2.3 Separat ion methods (part I)  20
2.4 Separat ion methods (part II)  22
2.5 Mor e about paper chromatography  24
 
 The chr
omatography detectives
 26
  Checkup on Chapter 2
 28
3.1 Atoms and el ements  30
3.2 Mor e about atoms  32
3.3 Isotopes and radioact ivity  34
3.4 How el ectrons are arranged  36
 
 How our model of the atom devel
oped
 38
 
 The atom: the inside story
 40
3.5 The metals and non-metals  42
  Checkup on Chapter 3
 44
4.1 C ompounds, mixtures, and chemical change  46
4.2 Wh y do atoms form bonds?  48
4.3 The ion ic bond  50
4.4 Mor e about ions  52
4.5 The c ovalent bond  54
4.6 C ovalent compounds  56
4.7 C omparing ionic and covalent compounds  58
4.8 G iant covalent structures  60
4.9 The bonding in metals  62
  Checkup on Chapter 4
 64
5.1 The names and f ormuale of compounds  66
5.2 Equat ions for chemical reactions  68
5.3 The masses of atoms, mol ecules. and ions  70
5.4 Some cal culations about masses and %  72
  Checkup on Chapter 5
 74States of matter
1
Separating substances
2
Atoms and elements
3
Atoms combining
4
Reacting masses, and chemical equations
56.1 The mol e  76
6.2 Cal culations from equations, using the mole  78
6.3 React ions involving gases  80
6.4 The c oncentration of a solution  82
6.5 F inding the empirical formula  84
6.6 Fr om empirical to final formula  86
6.7 F inding % yield and % purity  88
  Checkup on Chapter 6
 90
7.1 Oxidat ion and reduction  92
7.2 Redo x and electron transfer  94
7.3 Redo x and changes in oxidation state  96
7.4 Oxidising and r educing agents  98
  Checkup on Chapter 7
 100
8.1 C onductors and insulators  102
8.2 The principl es of electrolysis  104
8.3 The r eactions at the electrodes  106
8.4 The el ectrolysis of brine  108
8.5 T wo more uses of electrolysis  110
  Checkup on Chapter 8
 112
9.1 Ener gy changes in reactions  114
9.2 Expla ining energy changes  116
9.3 Ener gy from fuels  118
9.4 G iving out energy as electricity  120
 
 The batteries in y
our life
 122
9.5 Reversibl e reactions  124
9.6 Sh ifting the equilibrium  126
  Checkup on Chapter 9
 128
10.1  Rates of r eaction  130
10.2  Measuring the rate of a r eaction  132
10.3  Changing the rate of a r eaction (part I)  134
10.4  Changing the rate of a r eaction (part II)  136
10.5  Expla ining rates  138
10.6  Catal ysts  140
 
 Mor
e about enzymes
 142
10.7  Photochem ical reactions  144
  Checkup on Chapter 10
 146Using moles
6
Redox reactions
7
Electricity and chemical change
8
Energy changes, and reversible reactions
9
The speed of a reaction
10

--- Page 6 ---
11.1  Acids and alk alis  148
11.2  A cl oser look at acids and alkalis  150
11.3  The r eactions of acids and bases  152
11.4  A cl oser look at neutralisation  154
11.5  Oxides  156
11.6  Making salts  158
11.7  Making insol uble salts by precipitation  160
11.8  F inding concentrations by titration  162
  Checkup on Chapter 11
 164
12.1  An overview of the P eriodic Table  166
12.2  Gr oup I: the alkali metals  168
12.3  Gr oup VII: the halogens  170
12.4  Gr oup 0: the noble gases  172
12.5  The transit ion elements  174
12.6  Acr oss the Periodic Table  176
 
 How the P
eriodic Table developed
 178
  Checkup on Chapter 12
 180
13.1  Metals: a r eview  182
13.2  C omparing metals for reactivity  184
13.3  Metals in c ompetition  186
13.4  The r eactivity series  188
13.5  Making use of the r eactivity series  190
  Checkup on Chapter 13
 192
14.1  Metals in the Earth’s crust  194
14.2  Extract ing metals from their ores  196
14.3  Extract ing iron  198
14.4  Extract ing aluminium  200
14.5  Making use of metals and al loys  202
14.6  Steels and steel-making  204
 
 Metals, civil
isation, and you
 206
  Checkup on Chapter 14
 208
15.1  What is a ir?  210
15.2  Making use of a ir  212
15.3  Pol lution alert!  214
15.4  The rust ing problem  216
15.5  W ater supply  218
 
 Living in space
 220
  Checkup on Chapter 15
 222
16.1  Hy drogen, nitrogen, and ammonia  224
16.2  Making ammon ia in industry  226Acids and bases
The Periodic Table
The behaviour of metals
Making use of metals
Air and water
Some non-metals and their compounds
16.3  F ertilisers  228
16.4  Sulfur and sulfur dio xide  230
16.5  Sulfuric acid  232
16.6  Carbon and the carbon cy cle  234
16.7  Some carbon c ompounds  236
16.8  Gr eenhouse gases, and global warming  238
16.9  Limestone  240
  Checkup on Chapter 16
 242
17.1  P etroleum: a fossil fuel  244
17.2  Refin ing petroleum  246
17.3  Cracking h ydrocarbons  248
17.4  F amilies of organic compounds  250
17.5  The alk anes  252
17.6  The alk enes  254
17.7  The al cohols  256
17.8  The carbo xylic acids  258
  Checkup on Chapter 17
 260
18.1  Intr oducing polymers  262
18.2  Addit ion polymerisation  264
18.3  C ondensation polymerisation  266
18.4  Making use of synthet ic polymers  268
18.5  Plast ics: here to stay?  270
18.6  The macr omolecules in food  (part I)  272
18.7  The macr omolecules in food  (part II)  274
18.8  Br eaking down the macromolecules  276
  Checkup on Chapter 18
 278
19.1  Chem istry: a practical subject  280
19.2  Ex ample of an experiment  282
19.3  W orking with gases in the lab  284
19.4  T esting for ions in the lab  286
  Checkup on Chapter 19
 288
Answers to the numerical quest
ions in this book
 290
 
Your Cambridge IGCSE chemistry exam
 
 About the Cambridge IGCSE chem
istry exam
 291
 
 Ex
am questions from Paper 2
 292
 
 Ex
am questions from Paper 3
 298
 
 Ex
am questions from Paper 6
 304
Reference
  Gl
ossary
 310
 
 The P
eriodic Table and atomic masses
 314
  Inde
x
 316Organic chemistry
Polymers
In the lab
19181711
12
13
14
15
16

--- Page 7 ---
1.1
Made of particles
Rock, air, and water look very different. But they have one big thing in 
common: they are all made of very tiny pieces, far too small to see.  For the moment, we will call these pieces particles.
In fact everything around you is made of particles – and so are you!
Particles on the move
In rock and other solids, the particles are not free to move around. But in 
liquids and gases, they move freely. As they move they collide with each other, and bounce off in all directions. 
So the path of one particle, in a liquid or gas, could look like this:
 All made of particles!
from
heretohere
The particle moves in a random way, changing direction every time it hits 
another particle. We call this random motion.
Some evidence for particles
There is evidence all around you that things are made of particles, and that they move around in liquids and gases. Look at these examples.
Evidence outside the lab
1 Cooking smells can spread out into the street. This 
is because ‘smells’ are caused by gas particles mixing with, and moving through, the air
. They dissolve in 
moisture in the lining of your nose.2  Y ou often see dust and smoke dancing in the air, in 
bright sunlight. The dust and smoke are clusters of particles. They dance around because they are being bombarded by tiny particles in the air. State S of matter
6
Everything is made of particles

--- Page 8 ---
Diffusion
In all those examples, particles mix by colliding with each other and 
bouncing off in all directions. This mixing process is called diffusion. 
The overall result is the flow of particles from where they are more 
concentrated to where they are less concentrated, until they are evenly spread out.
So what are these particles?
The very smallest particles, that we cannot break down further by chemical means, are called atoms.
  In some substances, the particles are just single atoms. For example argon,
 a gas found in air, is made up of single argon atoms.
  In many substances, the particles consist of two or more atoms joined together
. These particles are called molecules. Water, bromine, and the 
gases nitrogen and oxygen in air, are made up of molecules.
  In other substances the particles consist of atoms or groups of atoms that carry a charge. These particles are called 
ions. Potassium 
manganate(VII) is made of ions.
You’ll find out more about all these particles in Chapters 2 and 3.
‘Seeing’ particles
We are now able to ‘see’ the particles in some solids, using very powerful microscopes. For example the image on the right shows palladium atoms sitting on carbon atoms. In this image, the atoms appear over 70 million times larger than they really are!
 This image was taken using a 
tunneling electr
on microscope.  
The white blobs are palladium atoms,  
the blue ones are carbon. (The colour was added to help us see them.)
Q
1 The particles in liquids and gases show random motion. 
What does that mean, and why does it occur?
2 Why does the purple colour spr ead when a crystal of 
potassium manganate(VII) is placed in water?3 Br omine vapour is heavier than air. Even so, it spreads 
upwards in the experiment above. Why?
4 a What is diffusion?   b  Use the idea of dif fusion to 
explain how the smell of perfume travels.
water
particle
the crystalparticles from
the crystal mixamong thewater particlesairparticle
bromine
particlebromine particles
and air particlesnow fully mixed
waterparticle
the crystalparticles from
the crystal mixamong thewater particlesairparticle
bromine
particlebromine particles
and air particlesnow fully mixed
1 Place a crystal of potassium manganate(VII) in a 
beaker of water
. The colour spreads through the water. 
Why? First, particles leave the crystal – it dissolves. 
Then they mix among the water particles.2  Place an open gas jar of air upside down on an open  
gas jar containing a few drops of red-brown bromine. The colour spreads upwards because particles of bromine vapour mix among the particles of air.Evidence in the lab
7State S of matter

--- Page 9 ---
1.2State S of matter
8
Solids, liquids, and gases
What’s the difference?
It is easy to tell the difference between a solid, a liquid and a gas:
Water: solid, liquid and gas
Water can be a solid (ice), a liquid (water), and a gas (water vapour or 
steam). Its state can be changed by heating or cooling:
And when steam is cooled, the opposite changes take place:
You can see that:
  condensing is the opposite of evaporating
  freezing is the opposite of melting
  the freezing point of water is the same as the melting point of ice, 0  °C.A solid has a fixed shape and a fixed 
volume. It does not flow. Think of all the solid things around you: their shapes and volumes do not change.A liquid flows easily. It has a fixed volume, but its shape changes. It takes the shape of the container you pour it into.A gas does not have a fixed volume or shape. It spreads out to fill its container. It is much lighter than the same volume of solid or liquid.
1
 Ice
 slowly changes to water, 
when it is put in a warm place. This change is called melting. The thermometer shows 0
 °
C until 
all the ice has melted. So 0
 
°C is 
called its melting point.2
 When the water is heated its 
temperature rises, and some of it changes to 
water vapour. This 
change is called evaporation. The hotter the water gets, the more quickly it evaporates.3
 Soon bubbles appear in the 
water
. It is boiling. The water 
vapour shows up as steam. The thermometer stays at 100
 °
C 
while the water boils off. 100
 
°C is 
the boiling point of water.
steam condenses to form watercool below 100 °C freezes  or solidiﬁes
to form icecool below 0 °Cthermometer
shows 0 °C
ice cubes meltingwater vapour
water
heatwater vapour(invisible)
steam(visible)thermometershows 100°C
boiling water
heat

--- Page 10 ---
Q
1 W rite down two properties of a solid, two of a liquid, and 
two of a gas.
2 Which wor d means the opposite of:
 a
 
boiling?
     
b
 
melting? 
3 Which has a lower fr eezing point, oxygen or ethanol?
4 Which has a higher boiling point, oxygen or ethanol?5 Look at the heating curve above. 
 a
  About how long did it take for the ice to melt, once 
melting started?
 b
 How long did boiling take to complete, once it started?
 c
 T
ry to think of a reason for the difference in a and b.
6 See if you can sketch a heating curve for sodium.
9State S of matter
Other things can change state too
It’s not just water! Nearly all substances can exist as solid, liquid and gas. 
Even iron and diamond can melt and boil! Some melting and boiling points are given below. Look how different they are.
Showing changes of state on a graph
Look at this graph. It shows how the temperature changes as a block of ice is steadily heated. First the ice melts to water. Then the water gets warmer and warmer, and eventually turns to steam: 
A graph like this is called a heating curve. 
Look at the step where the ice is melting. Once melting starts, the 
temperature stays at 0
 
°C until all the ice has melted. When the water 
starts to boil, the temperature stays at 100
 
°C until all the water has turned 
to steam. So the melting and boiling points are clear and sharp.Substance Melting point  / °C Boiling point  / °C
oxygen –219 –183
ethanol –15 78
sodium 98 890
sulfur 119 445
iron 1540 2900
diamond 3550 4832
Heating curve for water
0123456789 10
Time (minutes)150
125100
755025
0
/H1100225water boilingwater
vapourgettinghotter
ice warming upice
meltingTemperature (°C)water warming up
(some evaporation occurs)
 Molten ir on being poured out at an 
iron works. Hot – over 1540
 
°C!
 Evaporation in the sunshine …


--- Page 11 ---
1.3
How the particles are arranged
Water can change from solid to liquid to gas. Its particles do not change. 
They are the same in each state. But their arrangement changes.  The same is true for all substances.
Changing state
Melting  When a solid is heated, its particles get more energy and vibrate  
more. This makes the solid expand. At the melting point, the 
 particles vibrate
 
so much that they break away from their positions. The solid turns liquid.State How the particles are arranged Diagram of particles
Solid
  
The particles in a solid are arrangedin a fixed pattern or lattice.Strong forces hold them together.So they cannot leave their positions.The only movements they make aretiny vibrations to and fro.
Liquid
 
The particles in a liquid can move about and slide past each other. They are still close together, but not in a lattice. The forces that hold them together are weaker than in a solid.
Gas
 
The particles in a gas are far apart,  and they move about very quickly. There are almost no forces holding them 
 together
. They collide with each 
other and bounce off in all directions.
solid the vibrations get larger a liquid is formedheat
energyheat energy at
melting pointState S of matter
10
The particles in solids, liquids, and gases

--- Page 12 ---
the particles get enough
energy to escape slow-moving particlesin liquid the particlesmove fasterheat energy at
boiling pointheat
energyBoiling  When a liquid is heated, its particles get more energy and move  
faster. They bump into each other more often, and bounce further apart. This 
makes the liquid expand. At the boiling point, the particles get enough energy to overcome the forces between them. They break away to form a gas:
Evaporating
 Some particles in a liquid have more energy than others. 
Even well below the boiling point, some have enough energy to escape 
and form a gas. This is called 
evaporation. It is why 
 puddles of rain dry 
up in the sun.
How much heat is needed?
The amount of heat needed to melt or boil a substance is different for every substance. That’s because the particles in each substance are different, with different forces between them. 
The stronger the forces, the more heat energy is needed to overcome 
them. So the higher the melting and boiling points will be.
Reversing the changes
You can reverse those changes again by cooling. As a gas cools, its particles lose energy and move more slowly. When they collide, they do not have enough energy to bounce away. So they stay close, and form a liquid. On further cooling, the liquid turns to a solid. 
Look at this diagram for water:
ice (solid) water (liquid)on heating, the particles gain energy
on cooling, the particles lose energy and move more slowly;
as they get closer together the forces of attraction take overmelts
at 0° Csteam (gas)as it warms up, some evaporates ;
the rest boils at 100° C
ice waterfreezes (solidiﬁes)
at 0° Csteamas you cool it below 100°C, the water
vapour begins to condense or liquify
Q
1 Using the idea of particles, explain why:
 a
 you can pour liquids
  
b
 solids expand on heating 
2 Draw a diagram to show what happens to the particles, 
when a liquid cools to a solid.3 Oxygen is the gas we br eathe in. It can be separated from 
the air. It boils at –219
 8
C and freezes at –183
 8
C.
 a
 In which state is oxygen, at:
  
i
 0
 8
C?
  
ii
 –200
 8
C?
 b
 How would you tur
n oxygen gas into solid oxygen?
!The kinetic particle theory
Look at the key ideas you have met:
 A substance can be a solid, a liquid, or a gas, and change from one state to another.
 It has different characteristics in each state. (For example, solids do not flow.)
 The differences are due to the way its particles are arranged, and move, in each state. 
Together, these ideas make up the kinetic particle theory. (Kinetic means about motion.)
11State S of matter

--- Page 13 ---
1.4State S of matter
12
A closer look at gases
What is gas pressure?
When you blow up a balloon, you fill it with air particles. They collide 
with each other. They also hit the sides of the balloon, and exert pressure on it. This pressure keeps the balloon inflated. 
In the same way, all gases exert a pressure. The pressure depends on the 
temperature of the gas and the volume it takes up, as you’ll see below.
When you heat a gas
The same happens with all gases: When you heat a gas in a closed container, its pressure increases.  That is why the pressure gets very high inside a pressure cooker.
When you squeeze a gas into a smaller space
The same thing is true for all gases: When a gas is compressed into a smaller space, its pressure increases.
All gases can be compressed. If enough force is applied, the particles can  
be pushed so close that the gas turns into a liquid. But liquids and solids cannot be compressed, because their particles are already very close together.The particles in this gas are moving fast. They hit the walls of the container and exert pressure on them. If you now heat the gas . . .. . . the particles take in heat energy and move even faster. They hit the walls more often, and with more force. So the gas pressure increases.
plunger pushed in
gas compressed
into a smallervolumegas particlesplunger pushed in
gas compressed
into a smallervolumegas particles
There is a lot of space between the 
particles in a gas. You can compress  
the gas, or force its particles closer, by pushing in the plunger …… like this. Now the particles are in a smaller space – so they hit the walls more often. So the gas pressure increases.
 In a pr essure cooker, water vapour 
(gas) is heated to well over 100
 
°C. So it 
is at high pressure. You must let a 
pressure cooker cool before you open it!
 When you blow up a bicycle tyr e, 
you compress air into the inner tube. The har der you blow, the greater the 
pressure inside the balloon.


--- Page 14 ---
13State S of matter
 The scent of flowers travels faster in 
a warm r
oom. Can you explain why?
 The faster a particle is moving when 
it hits another
, the faster and further it 
will bounce away. Just like snooker balls!The rate of diffusion of gases
On page 7 you saw that gases diffuse because the particles collide with 
other particles, and bounce off in all directions. But gases do not all diffuse at the same rate, every time. It depends on these two factors:
1
 The mass of the particles
 
The particles in hydrogen chloride gas are twice as heavy as those in 
ammonia gas. So which gas do you think will dif
fuse faster? Let’s see:
  Cotton wool soaked in ammonia solution is put into one end of a long tube (at A below). It gives of
f ammonia gas.
  At the same time , cotton wool soaked in hydrochloric acid is put into 
the other end of the tube (at B). It gives off hydrogen chloride gas.
  The gases dif fuse along the tube. White smoke forms where they meet:
The white smoke forms closer to B. So the ammonia particles have travelled further than the hydrogen chloride particles – which means they have travelled faster. The lower the mass of its particles, the faster a gas will diffuse.
That makes sense when you think about it. When particles collide and 
bounce away, the lighter particles will bounce further.
The particles in the two gases above are molecules. The mass of a 
molecule is called its relative molecular mass. So we can also say: The lower its relative molecular mass, the faster a gas will diffuse.
2
 The temperature
 
When a gas is heated, its particles take in heat energy
, and move faster. 
They collide with more energy, and bounce further away. So the gas 
diffuses faster. The higher the temperature, the faster a gas will diffuse.AB
cotton wool soaked
in ammonia solutionglass
tubewhite smoke
forms herecotton wool soakedin hydrochloric acid
Q
1 What causes the pressure in a gas?
2 Why does a balloon burst if you keep on blowing?
3  A gas is in a sealed container . How do you think the  
pressure will change if the container is cooled?  
Explain your answer.
4  A gas flows fr om one container into a larger one.  
What do you think will happen to its pressure?  Draw diagrams to explain.5 a Why does the scent of perfume spr ead?
 b
  Why does the scent of perfume wear of
f faster in warm 
weather than in cold?
6  Of all gases, hydr ogen diffuses fastest at any given 
temperature. What can you tell from this?
7  Look at the glass tube above. Suppose it was warmed a little in an oven, befor
e the experiment. Do you think that would 
change the result? If so, how?

--- Page 15 ---
Checkup on Chapter 1
Questions
Core curriculum
1 A large crystal of potassium manganate(VII) was 
placed in the bottom of a beaker of cold water
, and 
left for several hours.
 cold water
crystal of potassium manganate(VII)
 a Describe what would be seen:
  
i
 after five minutes
  
ii
 after several hours
 b
 Explain your answers using the idea of particles.
 c
  Name the two processes that took place during the experiment.
2
 Use the idea of particles to explain why:
 a
 solids have a definite shape
 b
 liquids fill the bottom of a container
 c
 you can’
t store gases in open containers
 d
  you can’
t squeeze a sealed plastic syringe that is 
completely full of water
 e
 a balloon expands as you blow into it.
3
  Below is a heating curve for a pure substance. It shows how the temperature rises over time, when the substance is heated until it melts, then boils.
 
 a What is the melting point of the substance?
 b
  What happens to the temperature while the substance changes state?
 c
  The graph shows that the substance takes longer to boil than to melt. Suggest a reason for this.
 d  How can you tell that the substance is not water?
 f
 Sketch a rough heating curve for pure water
.Revision checklist
Core curriculum
Make sure you can …
 give two examples of evidence, from the lab, that   
matter is made of particles
 explain what diffusion is, and how it happens
 name the three states of matter , and give their   
physical properties (hard, fixed shape, and so on)
 describe, and sketch, the particle arrangement in   
each state
 describe how a substance changes state when you   
heat it, and explain this using the idea of particles
 explain, and use, these terms:  
 
melt
 boil
 evaporate
 condense 
 melting point
 boiling point
 freezing point
 sketch, and label, a heating curve
 explain why a gas exerts a pressure
 explain why the pressure increases when you:
 
–
 heat a gas
 
–
 push it into a smaller space
Extended curriculum
Make sure you can also …
 describe an experiment to show that a gas will  
diffuse faster than another gas that has heavier particles 
 say how , and why, the temperature affects the rate 
at which a gas diffusesState S of matter
14


--- Page 16 ---
4 A cooling curve  is the opposite of a heating curve. 
It shows how the temperature of a substance 
changes with time, as it is cooled from a gas to a solid. Here is the cooling curve for one substance:
 
 a  What is the state of the substance at room temperature (20 
 
°C)?
 b
  Use the list of melting and boiling points on page 9 to identify the substance.
 c
 Sketch a cooling curve for pure water
. 
5
 Using the idea of particles explain why:
 a the smell of burnt food travels through the house
 b
  when two solids are placed on top of each other
, 
they do not mix
 c
 pumping up your bike tyres gives a smooth ride
 d
 smokers can cause lung damage in other people
 
e
  heating a gas in a closed container will increase its pressure
 f
 
  a liquid is used in a car’
s breaking system, to 
transfer the pressure from the brake pedal
 g
  poisonous gases from a factory chimney can af
fect a large area.
6 
 a
 Which of these are examples of dif
fusion?
  
i
 a helium-filled balloon rising in air 
  
ii
  a hydrogen-filled balloon deflating, due to gas passing through the skin
  
iii
  the smell of perfume from a person standing on the other side of a room
  
iv
  sucking a drink from a bottle, using a straw 
  v
  an ice lolly turning liquid when it is left out of the freezer
  
vi
  the tea in the cup changing colour when you
 add milk, without stirring
  
vii
  a light, coloured gas, spreading down through a gas jar 
  
viii
  a blue crystal forming a blue solution, when it is left sitting in a glass of water
  
ix
 spraying paint from a spray can. 
 b
  For 
one of the examples of diffusion, draw a 
diagram showing the particles before and after diffusion has taken place.Extended curriculum
7 Y ou can measure the rate of diffusion of a gas 
using this apparatus. The gas enters through the thin tube: 
 air H2
plug of
porous plasterhydrogengas (H
2) in
water risingin tube
water0
10
203040
 The measuring tube is sealed at the top with a plug 
of porous plaster
. Air and other gases can diffuse in 
and out through the tiny holes in the plug. 
 The water rises in the measuring tube if the chosen gas dif
fuses out through the plug faster than air 
diffuses in. Air is mainly nitrogen and oxygen.
 
a
  When you use hydrogen gas, the water rises in the measuring tube. Why?
 b  What does this tell you about the rate of dif
fusion 
of hydrogen, compared to the gases in air?
 c
  Explain your answer to 
b. Use the term mass! 
 d
  The molecules in carbon dioxide are heavier than those in nitrogen and oxygen. 
   So what do you think will happen to the water in the measuring tube, when you use carbon dioxide? Explain your answer
.
8
 Gas Formula Relative atomic or  
molecular mass
methane CH4 16
helium He 4
oxygen O2 32
nitrogen N2 28
chlorine Cl2 71
 Look at the table above.
 a
 Which two gases will mix fastest? Explain.
 b
  Which gas will take least time to escape from a gas syringe?
 c
  W
ould you expect chlorine to diffuse more 
slowly than the gases in air? Explain.
 d
  An unknown gas dif
fuses faster than nitrogen, 
but more slowly than methane. What you can say about its relative molecular mass?State S of matter
15

--- Page 17 ---
2.1
Mixtures
A mixture contains more than one substance. The substances are just 
mixed together, and not chemically combined. For example:
 air is a mixture of nitrogen, oxygen, and small amounts of other gases
 shampoo is a mixture of several chemicals and water .
Solutions
When you mix sugar with water, the sugar seems to disappear. That is because its particles spread all through the water particles, like this:
The sugar has dissolved in the water, giving a mixture called a solution. Sugar is the solute, and water is the solvent:
solute 1 solvent 5 solutionYou can’t get the sugar out again by filtering.
Not everything dissolves so easily
Now think about chalk. If you mix chalk powder with water, most of the 
powder eventually sinks to the bottom. You can get it out again by filtering.
Why is it so different for sugar and chalk? Because their particles are very different! How easily a substance dissolves depends on the particles in it. Look at the examples in this table:
Compound Mass (g) dissolving in 100 g of water at 25  °C
silver nitrate 241.3
calcium nitrate 102.1
sugar (glucose) 91.0
potassium nitrate 37.9
potassium sulfate 12.0
calcium hydroxide 0.113
calcium carbonate (chalk) 0.0013
silver chloride 0.0002
So silver nitrate is much more soluble than sugar – but potassium nitrate is a lot less soluble than sugar. It all depends on the particles.
Look at calcium hydroxide. It is only very slightly or sparingly soluble 
compared with the compounds above it. Its solution is called limewater.
Now look at the last two substances in the table. They are usually called 
insoluble since so very little dissolves.decreasing
solubility
 A mixtur e of sugar and water. 
This mixture is a solution.
 A mixtur e of chalk powder and 
water. This is not a solution. The tiny 
chalk particles do not separate and spread through the water particles. They stay in clusters big enough to see. In time, most sink to the bottom.
!What’s soluble, what’s not?
 The solubility of every substance is 
dif
ferent.
 But there are some overall patterns. For example all sodium compounds are soluble.
 Find out more on page 160.Separating 
S
ub
S
tance
S
16
Mixtures, solutions, and solvents

--- Page 18 ---
waterstirring rod sugarHelping a solute dissolve
Q
1 Explain each term in your own wor ds:
 a
 soluble
 b
 insoluble
 c
 aqueous solution
2 Look at the table on page 16.
 a
  Which substance in it is the most soluble?
 b
  About how many times mor
e soluble is this substance 
than potassium sulfate, at 25
 
°C?
 c
  The substance in 
a gives a colourless solution. What will 
you see if you add 300 g of it to 100 g of water at 25
 °C?
 d
  What will you see if you heat up the mixtur
e in c?3 Now turn to the table at the top of page 160.
 a
  Name two metals that have 
no insoluble salts.
 b
  Name one other gr
oup of salts that are always soluble.
4 See if you can give three examples of:
 a
  solids you dissolve in water
, at home
 b
  insoluble solids you use at home.
5 Name two solvents other than water that are used in the 
home. What are they used for?
6 Many gases dissolve in water. Try to give some examples.Sugar dissolves quite slowly in 
water at room temperature. If you stir the liquid, that helps. But if you keep on adding sugar …… eventually no more of it will dissolve, no matter how hard you stir. The extra sinks to the bottom. The solution is now saturated.But look what happens if you heat the solution. The extra sugar dissolves. Add more sugar and it will dissolve too, as the temperature rises.
So sugar is more soluble in hot water than in cold water.
A soluble solid usually gets more soluble as the temperature rises.A solution is called saturated when it can dissolve no more solute, at 
that temperature.
Water is not the only solvent
Water is the world’s most common solvent. A solution in water is called an aqueous solution (from aqua, the Latin word for water).
But many other solvents are used in industry and about the house, to 
dissolve substances that are insoluble in water. For example:
Solvent It dissolves
white spirit gloss paint
propanone (acetone) grease, nail polish
ethanol glues, printing inks, the scented substances that are used  
in perfumes and aftershaves
All three of these solvents evaporate easily at room temperature – they are 
volatile. This means that glues and paints dry easily. Aftershave feels cool because ethanol cools the skin when it evaporates.extra sugar sinks
to bottomall the sugarhas dissolved
heat
!About volatile liquids
 A volatile  liquid is one that evaporates easily. 
 This is a sign that the for ces between its particles are weak.  
 So volatile liquids have low boiling points too. (Pr opanone boils at 56.5 °C.)
17Separating SubStance S
 Nail polish is insoluble in water .  
It can be removed later by dissolving  
it in propanone.


--- Page 19 ---
2.2Separating SubStance S
18
Pure substances and impurities
What is a pure substance?
water 
particlewater particle water particle
This is water. It has only water 
particles in it, and nothing else. So it is 100% pure. This water has particles of other substances mixed with it. So it is not pure.This water has particles of a harmful substance in it. So it is not pure – and could make you ill.
A pure substance has no particles of any other substance mixed with it.
In real life, very few substances are 100% pure. For example tap water 
contains small amounts of many different particles (such as calcium ions and chloride ions). The particles in it are not usually harmful – and some are even good for you.
Distilled water is much purer than tap water, but still not 100% pure.  
For example it may contain particles of gases, dissolved from the air. 
Does purity matter?
Often it does not matter if a substance is not pure. We wash in tap water, without thinking too much about what is in it. But sometimes purity is very important. If you are making a new medical drug, or a flavouring for food, you must make sure it contains nothing that could harm people.
An unwanted substance, mixed with the substance you want, is called  
an impurity.
 Baby foods and milk powder ar e tested in the factory, to 
make sure they contain no harmful impurities. Getting r eady for a jab. Vaccines and medicines must be 
safe, and free of harmful impurities. So they are tested heavily.

--- Page 20 ---
These are the melting and boiling 
points for two pure substances: sulfur and water.This sulfur sample melts sharply at 119
 
°C and boils at 445
 
°C. So it 
must be pure.This water freezes around 20.5  °C 
and boils around 101
 
°C. So it is 
not pure.
Q
1 What does a pure substance mean?
2 Y ou mix instant coffee with water, to make a cup of coffee. 
Is the coffee an impurity? Explain.3 Explain why melting and boiling points can be used as a way 
to check purity
.
4 Could ther e be impurities in a gas? Explain.
!ID check!
  Every substance has a unique pair of melting and boiling points. 
  So you can also use melting and boiling points to identify a substance. 
  First, measure them. Then look up data tables to find out what the substance is.
19Separating SubStance S
 At the end of this r eaction, the 
beaker may contain several products, 
plus reactants that have not reacted. Separating them can be a challenge!
How can you tell if a substance is pure?
Chemists use some complex methods to check purity. But there is one 
simple method you can use in the lab: you can check melting and boiling points.
  A pure substance has a definite, sharp, melting point and boiling point.  
These are different for each substance. You can look them up in tables. 
 When a substance contains an impurity:
 –
 its melting point falls and its boiling point rises
 –
 it melts and boils over a range of temperatures, not sharply
. 
 The more impurity there is:
 –
 the bigger the change in melting and boiling points
 –
  the wider the temperature range over which melting and boiling occur
. 
For example:
Substance sulfur water
Melts at (
 
°C) 119 0
Boils at (
 
°C) 445 100
Separation: the first step in obtaining a pure substance
When you carry out a reaction, you usually end up with a mixture of 
substances. Then you have to separate the one you want. 
The table below shows some separation methods. These can give quite 
pure substances. For example when you filter off a solid, and rinse it well with distilled water, you remove a lot of impurity. But it is just not possible to remove every tiny particle of impurity, in the school lab.
Method of separation Used to separate…
filtration a solid from a liquid
crystallisation a solute from its solution
evaporation a solute from its solution
simple distillation a solvent from a solution
fractional distillation liquids from each other
paper chromatography different substances from a solution
There is more about these methods in the next three units.

--- Page 21 ---
2.3
!Saturated solutions
 Remember , most solutes get more 
soluble as the temperature rises – 
so less soluble as it falls!
 A saturated solution can hold no mor
e solute, at that temperature. Separating 
S
ub
S
tance
S
20
Separation methods (part I)
For example, chalk is insoluble in water. So it is easy to separate by filtering. 
The chalk is trapped in the filter paper, while the water passes through. The trapped solid is called the residue. The water is the filtrate.
1
 This is a solution of copper(II) 
sulfate in water
. You want to obtain 
solid copper(II) sulfate from it.2
 So you heat the solution to 
evaporate some of the water
. It 
becomes more concentrated.3
 Eventually the solution becomes 
saturated
. If you cool it now, 
crystals will start to form. 
4 Check that it is ready by placing a
 
drop on a microscope slide.
 Crystals
 
will form quickly on the cool glass.5
 Leave the solution to cool. 
Crystals start to form in it, as the temperature falls.6
 Remove the crystals by filtering.
 
Then rinse them with distilled water and dry them with filter paper.ﬁlter paper
ﬁlter funnel
ﬂaskchalk (the residue)
water (the ﬁltrate)suspension of
chalk in water
heat heat heat heat heat heat
blue crystalsof copper(II)sulfate
dilute copper (II)
sulfate solutionglass ro d
microscopeslide2 By cry stallisation
You can obtain many solids from their solutions by letting crystals form. 
The process is called crystallisation. It works because soluble solids tend to be less soluble at lower temperatures. For example:Separating a solid from a liquid
Which method should you use? It depends on whether the solid is dissolved, and how its solubility changes with temperature.
1 By filtering
 Filtering in the kitchen …

--- Page 22 ---
Q
1 What does this term mean?  Give an example.
 a
 
filtrate
 b
 r
esidue
2 Y ou have a solution of sugar in water. You want to obtain 
the sugar from it.
 a
 Explain why filtering will not work.
 b
 Which method will you use instead?3 Describe how you would crystallise potassium nitrate fr om 
its aqueous solution.
4 How would you separate salt and sugar? Mention any 
special safety pr
ecaution you would take.
5 Now see if you can think of a way to get clean sand fr om a 
mixture of sand and little bits of iron wire.
21Separating SubStance S
 Making a living fr om crystallisation. 
Seawater is led into shallow ponds.  
The water evaporates in the sun.  He collects the sea salt, and sells it.
To obtain salt from an aqueous 
solution, you need to keep heating the solution, to evaporate the water. When there is only a little water left, the salt will start to appear. Heat carefully until it is dry.
 Evaporating the water fr om a 
solution of salt in water.
 Evaporating the ethanol fr om a 
solution of sugar in ethanol, over a 
water bath.
evaporating
dish
salt solution
the water evaporates
leaving the salt behindheatevaporating
dish
salt solution
the water evaporates
leaving the salt behindheat3 By evaporat ing all the solvent
For some substances, the solubility changes very little as the temperature 
falls. So crystallisation does not work for these. Salt is an example.
Separating a mixture of two solids
To separate two solids, you could choose a solvent that will dissolve just one of them. 
For example, water dissolves salt but not sand. So you could separate a 
mixture of salt and sand like this:
1
 Add water to the mixture, and stir
. The salt dissolves.
2
  Filter the mixture. The sand is trapped in the filter paper
, but the salt  
solution passes through.
3
 Rinse the sand with water
, and dry it in an oven.
4
 Evaporate the water from the salt solution, to give dry salt.
W
ater could not be used to separate salt and sugar, because it dissolves 
both. But you could use ethanol, which dissolves sugar but not salt. Ethanol 
is flammable, so should be evaporated over a water bath, as shown here.

--- Page 23 ---
2.4Separating SubStance S
22
Separation methods (part II)
water out
condenser
salt water
water in
distilled waterheat
fractionating
column packedwith glass beads
ethanol
ethanol and waterthermometer
condenserwater out
water in
heat
 A petr oleum refinery. It produces 
petrol and many other useful substances, 
with the help of fractional distillation.
Simple distillation
This is a way to obtain the solvent from a solution.  
The apparatus is shown on the right. It could be used to  obtain water from salt water, for example. Like this:
1
  Heat the solution in the flask. As it boils, water 
 
vapour rises into the condenser, leaving salt behind.
2
 The condenser is cold, so the vapour condenses to 
 
 water in it.
3
  The water drips into the beaker
. It is called distilled  
water. It is almost pure. 
You could get drinking water from seawater, in this way. 
Many countries in the Middle East obtain drinking water  by distilling seawater in giant distillation plants. 
Fractional distillation
This is used to separate a mixture of liquids from each other. It makes use of their different boiling points. You could use it to separate a mixture of ethanol and water, for example. The apparatus is shown on the right. 
These are the steps:1
  Heat the mixture in the flask. At about 78
 °C, the ethanol 
begins to boil. Some water evaporates too. So a mixture of 
ethanol and water vapours rises up the column.
2
  The vapours condense on the glass beads in the column, making them hot.
3
  When the beads reach about 78
 °C, ethanol vapour no longer 
condenses on them. Only the water vapour does. So water drips back into the flask. The ethanol vapour goes into the condenser
.
4
  There it condenses. Pure liquid ethanol drips into the beaker
.
5
  Eventually
, the thermometer reading rises above 78 
 °C – 
 
a sign that all the ethanol has gone. So you can stop heating.
Fractional distillation in industry
Fractional distillation is very important in industry. It is used:
  in the petroleum industry , to refine crude oil into petrol and 
other groups of compounds. The oil is heated and the vapours rise to different heights, up a tall steel fractionating column.  See page 247.
  in producing ethanol . The ethanol is made by fermentation, 
using sugar cane or other plant material. It is separated from the fermented mixture by fractional distillation. Ethanol is used as a solvent, and as car fuel. See page 256.
  to separate the gases in air. The air is cooled until it is liquid, 
then warmed up. The gases boil off one by one. See page 212.

--- Page 24 ---
Q
1 How would you obtain pur e water from seawater?
 Draw the apparatus, and explain how the method works.
2 Why ar e condensers called that? What is the cold water for?
3 Y ou would not use exactly the same apparatus you 
described in 1, to separate ethanol and water. Why not?4 Explain how fractional distillation works.
5 In the last chr omatogram above, how can you tell that X 
does not contain substance C?
6 Look at the first chr omatogram above. Can you think of a 
way to separate the coloured substances from the paper?
23Separating SubStance S
ﬁlter paperdropper with ink dropper with water
colours begin
to separate
ﬁlter paperdropper with ink dropper with water
colours begin
to separateblue ring
red ring yellow ring
pencil line
XA BC D XA BC Dglass tank with lid
clip
propanonepencil line
XA BC D XA BC Dglass tank with lid
clip
propanonepencil line
XA BC D XA BC Dglass tank with lid
clip
propanonePaper chromatography
This method can be used to separate a mixture of substances.  
For example, you could use it to find out how many different dyes there are in black ink: 
1
 Place a drop of black ink in the
 
centre of some filter paper. Let it dry. 
Then add three or four more drops on the same spot, in the same way.2
 Now drip water onto the ink 
spot, one drop at a time. The ink slowly spreads out and separates into rings of dif
ferent colours.3
 Suppose there are three rings: 
yellow
, red and blue. This shows 
that the ink contains three dyes, coloured yellow, red and blue.
1
 Prepare concentrated solutions 
of 
X, A, B, C, and D, in propanone. 
Place a spot of each along a line, on chromatography paper. Label them.2
 Stand the paper in a little
 
propanone, in a covered glass tank. The solvent rises up the paper. When it’s near the top, remove the paper.3
 X has separated into three spots.
 
Two are at the same height as A  and 
B, so X  must contain substances A 
and B. Does it also contain C  and D ?The dyes in the ink have different solubilities in water. So they travel across the paper at different rates. (The most soluble one travels fastest.) That is why they separate into rings. The filter paper with the coloured rings is called a chromatogram. (Chroma means colour.)
Paper chromotography can also be used to identify substances. For 
example, mixture X is thought to contain substances A, B, C, and D, which are all soluble in propanone. You could check the mixture like this:
Note that you must use a pencil to draw the line on the chromatography 
paper. If you use a biro or felt-tipped pen, the ink will run.

--- Page 25 ---
2.5Separating SubStance S
24
More about paper chromatography
How paper chromatography works
Paper chromatography depends on how the substances in a mixture 
interact with the chromatography paper and the solvent. 
chromatography paper
1 These coloured dots represent  
a mixture of two substances.  The mixture is dissolved in a suitable solvent.2
 The two substances travel over  
the paper at different speeds, because of their different solubilities in the solvent, and attraction to the paper.3
  Eventually they get completely 
separated from each other
. Now 
you can identify the substances – and even collect them if you wish.
 The five mystery solutions.The more soluble a substance is in the solvent, the further it will travel up the chromatography paper.
Making use of paper chromatography
You can use paper chromatography to:
  identify a substance 
  separate mixtures of substances
  purify a substance, by separating it from its impurities.
Example: Identify substances in a colourless mixture
On page 23, paper chromatography was used to identify coloured substances. Now for a bigger challenge!
Test-tubes A
 
–
 
E on the right below contain five colourless solutions of 
amino acids, dissolved in water. The solution in A contains several 
amino acids. The other solutions contain just one each. 
Your task is to identify all the amino acids in A
 
–
 
E. 
 
1
  Place a spot of each solution along a line drawn in pencil on  
slotted chromatography paper
, as shown below. (The purpose  
of the slots is to keep the samples separate.)  Label each spot in pencil at the top of the paper.
 Amino acids coming up! When you 
digest food, the pr
oteins in it are broken 
down to amino acids. Your body needs 
20 different amino acids to stay healthy.

--- Page 26 ---
Q
1 Explain in your own wor ds how paper chromatography 
works.
2 a What do you think a locating agent is?
 b
  Why would you need one, in an experiment to separate 
amino acids by chr
omatography?
3 What makes Rf values so useful? 4 For the chr omatogram above:
 a
  W
ere any of the amino acids in B
 
–
 
E also present in A? 
How can you tell at a glance?
 b
  Using a ruler
, work out the Rf values for the amino acids 
in A
 
–
 
E.
 c
 Now use the 
Rf table above to name them.
25Separating SubStance S
ﬁnal
solvent level
starting pointABC DE
 2  Place a suitable solvent in the bottom of a beaker . (For amino acids,  
a mixture of water, ethanoic acid and butanol is suitable.)
 3
  Roll the chromatography paper into a cylinder and place it in the 
beaker
. Cover the beaker.
 4
  The solvent rises up the paper
. When it has almost reached the top, 
remove the paper.
 
5
  Mark a line in pencil on it, to show where the solvent reached. (Y
ou 
can’t tell where the amino acids are, because they are colourless.)
 6
 Put the paper in an oven to dry out.
 7
  Next spray it with a 
locating agent to make the amino acids show up. 
Ninhydrin is a good choice. (Use it in a fume cupboard!) After spraying, heat the paper in the oven for 10 minutes. The spots turn purple. So now you have a proper chromatogram. 
 8
  Mark a pencil dot at the centre of each spot. Measure from the base line to each dot, and to the line showing the final solvent level.
 9
 Now work out the 
Rf value for each amino acid. Like this:
  Rf value 5   distance moved by amino acid    _______________________________    distance moved by solvent  
 
10
  Finally
, look up Rf tables to identify the amino acids.  
Part of an Rf table for the solvent you used is shown on the right.  
The method works because: the Rf value of a compound is always 
the same for a given solvent, under the same conditions.Rf values for amino acids  
(for water
 
/
 
butanol
 
/
 
ethanoic acid 
as solvent)
amino acid Rf value
cysteine 0.08
lysine 0.14
glycine 0.26
serine 0.27
alanine 0.38
proline 0.43
valine 0.60 
leucine 0.73

--- Page 27 ---
26Separating SubStance S
The chromatography detectives
 After a crime, the for ensic detectives move in, looking for fingerprints and other 
samples they can use in evidence.
The key ideas in chromatography.
Much of chromatography is detective work. You have already met paper 
chromatography. There are many other kinds too. But the key ideas are always the same. 
 Y ou need two phases:
 
–
 a non-moving or 
stationary phase, such as filter paper
 –
  a moving or 
mobile phase. This consists of the mixture you want to 
separate, dissolved in a solvent. 
  The substances in the mixture separate because each has dif ferent 
levels of attraction to the solvent and the stationary phase. Look at the diagram on the right.
  Y ou can then identify each separated substance. Depending on the 
technique you use, you can also collect them.
Ringing the changes
Although those key ideas are always the same, the techniques used for chromatography can be quite different. For example:
The stationary phase could be … The mobile phase could be … To analyse the substances, you could …
 paper , as in paper chromatography
 a thin coat of an adsorbent substance 
on a glass plate, or inside a tube
 plastic beads packed into a tube a mixtur e of substances dissolved in a 
liquid, as in paper chromatography
 a mixtur e of gases, carried in an inert 
(unreactive) gas; this is called gas chromatography study the colour ed spots on the 
chromatogram, as in paper chromatography
 pass them thr ough a machine that will help 
you analyse them
the two substances
have now separated
the two substances
begin to separate as themobile phase moves
mobile phase
(in this case a mixtureof two substancesdissolved in a solvent)
stationary phase
 How chr omatography works.

--- Page 28 ---
27Separating SubStance S
Chromatography and crime detection
Chromatography is widely used in crime detection. For example it is 
used to analyse samples of fibre from crime scenes, check people’s blood for traces of illegal drugs, and examine clothing for traces of explosives. 
This shows how a blood sample could be analysed, for traces of illegal 
drugs, or a poison, using gas chromatography: 
2
 A sample of blood 
is injected into 
 
the carrier gas.3
 The mixture goes into a 
hot oven, where the blood 
sample forms a vapour
.
1
 The carrier gas is fed 
 
in. It could be helium or nitrogen, for example.4
 The vapour
 moves  
over the stationary phase:  an adsorbent substance lining a coiled glass tube.5
 The separated 
substances pass into a mass spectrometer
, 
where they are analysed.  6
 The data is fed into  
a recorder
. The police 
study it. They might make an arrest …
Other uses
Chromatography can be used on a small scale in the lab, or on a very large scale in industry. For example it is used on a small scale to:
 identify substances (such as amino acids, on page 277)
 check the purity of substances 
 help in crime detection (as above)
 identify pollutants in air , or in samples of river water.
It is used on a large scale to:
  separate pure substances (for example for making medical drugs or food
 flavourings) from tanks of reaction mixtures, in factories
  separate individual compounds from the groups of compounds (fractions)
 obtained in refining petroleum.
So chromatography is a really powerful and versatile tool.OVENinjector
carrier gas
coiled glass tubemass
spectrometer
recorder
 Injecting a sample into the carrier 
gas, at the start of gas chr
omatography.
 Collecting water samples, to analyse  
for pollutants. The factories that produce 
them could then be identified 
 – and fined.


--- Page 29 ---
Questions
Core curriculum
1  This question is about ways to separate and purify  
substances. Match each term on the left with the 
correct description on the right.
evaporation A
a solid appears as the solution cools i
condensing B
used to separate a mixture of two liquids ii
filtering C
the solvent is removed as a gas iii
crystallising D
this method allows you to recycle a solventiv
distillation E
a gas changes to a liquid, on cooling v
fractional distillation F
separates an insoluble substance from a liquidvi
 
2 This apparatus can be used to obtain pure water from salt water
.
ice-cold
watericesalt water
heat
 a What is the purpose of the ice-cold water?
 b
 The glass arm must reach far down into the 
 
 second test-tube. Why?
 c
 Where in the apparatus does this take place?
  
i
 
evaporation
  
ii
 condensation
 d
 What is this separation method called?
 e
  What will remain in the first test-tube, at the 
end of the experiment?Revision checklist
Core curriculum
Make sure you can …
 define and use these terms:  
 mixture
 solute
 solvent
 solution
 aqueous solution 
 give at least three examples of solvents 
 state that most solids become more soluble as the temperature of the solvent rises
 explain what these terms mean:  
 pure substance
 impurity
 give examples of where purity is very important
 say how melting and boiling points change, when  
an impurity is present 
 decide whether a substance is pure, from melting and boiling point data
 describe these methods for separating mixtures, and sketch and label the apparatus:
 
filtration
 
crystallisation
 evaporation to dryness
 simple distillation
 fractional distillation
 paper chromatography 
 explain why each of those separation methods works 
 say which method you would choose for a given mixture, and why 
 identify the coloured substances present in a mixture, 
using chromatography
Extended curriculum
Make sure you can also …
 explain what a locating agent is
 describe how to carry out chromatography , to 
identify colourless substances
 define Rf value
 identify the substances in a mixture, given a chromatogram and a table of 
Rf values.
Checkup on Chapter 2
Separating SubStance S
28

--- Page 30 ---
3 Seawater can be purified using this apparatus:
seawater
beakerB
C
A
heat
 a i   What is the maximum temperature recorded  
on the thermometer, during the distillation?
  ii
  How does this compare to the boiling point 
of the seawater?
 
b
  In which piece of apparatus does evaporation take place? Give its name.
 c
 i
 Which is the condenser
, A, B, or C?
  
ii
 Where does the supply of cold water enter?
 d
  Distillation is used rather than filtration, to purify seawater for drinking. Why?
4
 Gypsum is insoluble in water
. You are asked to 
purify a sample of gypsum that is contaminated with a soluble salt.
 a Wh ich of these pieces of apparatus will you use?  
 Bunsen burner  filter funnel  tripod
  distillation flask
 conical flask
 pipette
  
thermometer
 condenser
 gauze
  stirring rod
 filter paper
 beaker
 b
 W
rite step-by-step instructions for the procedure.
5
 Argon, oxygen, and nitrogen are obtained from air by fractional distillation. Liquid air
, at 2250
 
°C, is 
warmed up, and the gases are collected one by one.
 a
 Is liquid air a mixture, or a pure substance?
 b
  Explain why fractional distillation is used, rather than simple distillation. 
 c
  During the distillation, nitrogen gas is obtained first, then argon and oxygen. What can you say about the
 boiling points of these three gases? 
6
 A mixture of salt and sugar has to be separated, using the solvent ethanol.
 a
  Draw a diagram to show how you will separate the salt.
 b
  How could you obtain sugar crystals from the sugar solution, 
without losing the ethanol? 
 c
 Draw a diagram of the apparatus for 
b.7
 In a chromatography experiment, eight coloured substances were spotted onto a piece of filter paper
. 
Three were the basic colours red, blue, and yellow. The others were unknown substances, labelled A
 –
 E. This shows the resulting chromatogram:
 a Which one of substances  A  –  E contains only  
 one basic colour?
 b
 Which contains all three basic colours?
 c
  The solvent was propanone. Which of the three basic colours is the most soluble in propanone?
Extended curriculum
8 The diagram below shows a chromatogram for a
 mixture of amino acids.
solvent
front
sample
placed hereon pencil line
initial
solvent level12 cm 7.2 cm
5.2 cm
 The solvent was a mixture of water , butanol, and 
ethanoic acid.
 
a
  Using the table of 
Rf values on page 25, identify  
the two amino acids.
 b
 Which of them is less soluble in the solvent?
 c
  How will the 
Rf values change if the solvent 
travels only 6 cm?
9
 Y
ou have three colourless solutions. Each contains 
an amino acid you must identify. 
 Explain how to do this using chromatography
.
Use the terms Rf and locating agent in your answer, 
and show that you understand what they mean.Separating SubStance S
29
